Int. J. Human–Computer Studies 160 (2022) 102772

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijhcs

Modeling and mitigating human annotation errors to design efficient
stream processing systems with human-in-the-loop machine learning
Rahul Pandey *, a, Hemant Purohit a, Carlos Castillo b, c, Valerie L. Shalin d
a

George Mason University, 4400 University Dr, Fairfax, VA, USA
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Plaza de la Merc, Barcelona, 10-12, Spain
c
ICREA, Pg. Lluís Companys 23, Barcelona, Spain
d
Wright State University, 3640 Colonel Glenn Hwy, Dayton, OH, USA
b

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Human-centered computing
Active learning
Annotation schedule
Memory decay
Human-AI collaboration

High-quality human annotations are necessary for creating effective machine learning-driven stream processing
systems. We study hybrid stream processing systems based on a Human-In-The-Loop Machine Learning (HITLML) paradigm, in which one or many human annotators and an automatic classifier (trained at least partially by
the human annotators) label an incoming stream of instances. This is typical of many near-real-time social media
analytics and web applications, including annotating social media posts during emergencies by digital volunteer
groups. From a practical perspective, low-quality human annotations result in wrong labels for retraining
automated classifiers and indirectly contribute to the creation of inaccurate classifiers.
Considering human annotation as a psychological process allows us to address these limitations. We show that
human annotation quality is dependent on the ordering of instances shown to annotators and can be improved by
local changes in the instance sequence/order provided to the annotators, yielding a more accurate annotation of
the stream. We adapt a theoretically-motivated human error framework of mistakes and slips for the human
annotation task to study the effect of ordering instances (i.e., an “annotation schedule”). Further, we propose an
error-avoidance approach to the active learning paradigm for stream processing applications robust to these
likely human errors (in the form of slips) when deciding a human annotation schedule. We support the human
error framework using crowdsourcing experiments and evaluate the proposed algorithm against standard
baselines for active learning via extensive experimentation on classification tasks of filtering relevant social
media posts during natural disasters.
According to these experiments, considering the order in which data instances are presented to a human
annotator leads to increased accuracy for machine learning and awareness of the potential properties of human
memory for the class concept, which may affect annotation for automated classifiers. Our results allow the design
of hybrid stream processing systems based on the HITL-ML paradigm, which requires the same amount of human
annotations, but that has fewer human annotation errors. Automated systems that help reduce human annotation
errors could benefit several web stream processing applications, including social media analytics and news
filtering.

2020 MSC:
00-01
99-00

1. Introduction
Filtering high-volume, high-velocity data streams is a typical process
in many application domains such as journalism, public health, and
crisis management. In this process, an avalanche of data must be filtered
and classified to prevent recipient information overload and filter failure
(Shirky, 2008). These continuous streams of data are often noisy, sparse,

and redundant. Humans cannot keep pace with the high velocity and
volume of data. A purely human-annotation based filtering system does
not scale. These data streams are also problematic for purely
automated/machine-annotation based filtering systems; depending on
the application, they may have limited accuracy. In the case of super­
vised classifiers for such automated filtering, data sampled from previ­
ously collected streams can bootstrap classifier training. However, it is

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: rpandey4@gmu.edu (R. Pandey).
URL: http://mason.gmu.edu/~rpandey4/ (R. Pandey).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2022.102772
Received 17 June 2020; Received in revised form 22 December 2021; Accepted 4 January 2022
Available online 10 January 2022
1071-5819/© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

R. Pandey et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 160 (2022) 102772

invaluable to have annotations on samples specifically from the current
data stream to adapt the pre-trained classifier model for the new data.
Hence, to achieve high accuracy in this process, online human annota­
tion tasks are needed within an active learning paradigm (Gama et al.,
2014), sometimes at a large scale. Fortunately, social media and mobile
devices have provided an unprecedented opportunity for the public to
participate by volunteering in stream processing applications for digital
humanitarianism, citizen science purposes, etc. A popular option for
annotating complex data streams has been to create hybrid stream
processing systems through a composition of human annotation tasks
and automatic online classification (Imran et al., 2013; Lofi and Maarry,
2014).
In this paper, we study a hybrid online classification setting that
categorizes relevant instances from a social media data stream using
human annotation tasks and an active learning paradigm. Drawing on
both classic (Ebbinghaus, 1913) and contemporary (Anderson, 2000)
cognitive psychology, we analyze the effective decay related to atten­
tional processes (described below) in human memory in contributing to
errors while doing human annotation tasks.1
Data challenges in hybrid stream processing. A key challenge in stream
processing is temporal variation in the concept space. This includes
changes in the distribution of data that leads to change in decision
boundaries (virtual drifts), changes in the population from which future
samples will be drawn (population drift), and changes in the definition
of a concept (concept drift) (Gama et al., 2014) as illustrated in Fig. 1.
For example, consider the task of processing crisis-related instances
posted on social media during a natural disaster, such as a hurricane. To
find instances that can help emergency managers in a response agency,
we need to categorize them as irrelevant or relevant for actionable
services (Purohit et al., 2018b), and in the case of relevant instances,
further categorize them into fine-grained information classes such as
infrastructure damage, donations, and so on (Castillo, 2016). In this
setting, both virtual drifts and population drifts occur as the crisis un­
folds. An example of virtual drift is content variation as a crisis evolves
(Olteanu et al., 2015; Sutton et al., 2015). Consider a class concept such
as caution and advice. In the beginning, instances might be urgent and
generic, warning the public about a potentially dangerous event (such as
a hurricane warning). Later, the same category of instances may become

more specific and less urgent (such as warning people to avoid drinking
contaminated water). An example of population drift is change in the
prevalence of different class instances, which follow a certain progres­
sion across many events (Olteanu et al., 2015). For instance, immedi­
ately after a sudden onset crisis event, instances of caution and advice
appear. Later on, other classes of information may be prevalent such as
appeals for relief donations. These temporal variations are expected.
They have a potential effect on annotation quality due to the learning
behavior of human annotators about the representation of a class
concept, which, in turn, impacts the entire system when used to train the
automatic part of a hybrid system.
Human challenges in hybrid stream processing. Human factors in the
annotation process affect the quality of annotations for hybrid stream
processing systems. Systems that rely on some form of crowdsourcing
are affected by cognitive properties of human annotators, including
their attentional heuristics (e.g., the fit with prior experience, the
associated positive or negative affect) and vigilance (the ability to sus­
tain high attention over time) (Burghardt et al., 2018). High mental
workload (e.g., demands on inference and decision making) causes a
deterioration in annotation quality, known as annotator burnout
(Marshall and Shipman, 2013), which can cause increased fatigue and
reduced motivation to maintain accuracy. To prevent annotator
burnout, one may cap the maximum number of annotation tasks per unit
of time that the annotator must perform, which can reduce workload
(Purohit et al., 2018a). Nevertheless, human error persists in the
execution of annotation tasks.
Psychologists distinguish between two types of human error: mis­
takes and slips (Reason, 2000). Mistakes result from incorrect or
incomplete knowledge (Reason, 2000). In the annotation task context,
this corresponds to annotators who have not yet grasped the concept to
be annotated or who are annotating new instances for which they have
not yet acquired a correct representation. Slips are errors in the presence
of correct and complete knowledge (Norman, 1981; Reason, 2000), i.e.,
annotator knowledge is correct, but idiosyncrasies in the activation of
this knowledge modify accessibility, resulting in an incorrect annotation
assignment. Persistent slips after a large number of examples may result
from vigilance decrements in underlying attentional processes (Wiener,
1987). The classic serial position effect (Murdock, 1962) supports this
distinction between knowledge-based mechanisms and attentional
processes, in which early items are properly encoded and hence
remembered while later items are only stored temporarily and subject to
decay. Item order matters, particularly when the content to be acquired
changes over time (Jacoby et al., 2001), as explained above under data
challenges.
1.1. Contributions
This paper extends our prior conference publication (Pandey et al.,
2019), with the following new contributions.
– First, we present a generic human error framework of mistakes and
slips, adapted from the psychological theories that cover some
common types of human errors and apply it to study human errors
possible in an annotation task for streaming data, using the active
learning system in a HITL-ML paradigm (Sections 3 and 4).
– Second, we extend the validation of the proposed human error
framework using a quantitative error model by presenting details of
both lab-based and crowdsourcing-based testing experiments for the
annotation task to filter relevant information from social media data
streams collected during crises (Sections 5 and 6).
– Third, we present a novel method for human error-mitigation in the
active learning paradigm for designing a stream processing system
against several baselines (Section 7). We also provide additional
novel insights on different automated algorithmic approaches to
prevent human error (Section 8).

Fig. 1. Categories of drift in streaming data Gama et al. (2014).

1
We appreciate the distinction between absent memory traces and the
challenges of retrieval (Tulving and Pearlstone, 1966). For the purposes of this
paper, the net result is memory decay that results in effective forgetting.

2

R. Pandey et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 160 (2022) 102772

The classic manipulation of beta is achieved by the imbalanced distri­
bution of positive and negative class instances or weighing the cost of
misses and false alarms differently.
Signal detection theory has been applied to the analysis of sequential
industrial inspection tasks, resulting in the supposition of a vigilance
decrements that affects judgment quality over time (Mackworth, 1948;
Wiener, 1987). This classic approach fails to recognize change over time
in the relevant features in the data. Moreover, though influential in the
perception literature, signal detection theory also fails to address several
issues that arise in conceptual judgment tasks. Much later, Kahneman
and Tversky (1979) elaborated a theory of bias to describe incoherence
in decision making depending upon the influence of contexts such as
prior belief or loss aversion. In this sense bias is an umbrella term to
characterize the systematic departure of decisions from rational anal­
ysis, which can account for a human annotator’s errors given a drifting
data stream.
The annotation task is typically multi-class for a variety of applica­
tions that adds task complexity and hence, cognitive demand on the
annotator. Following an initial training period, the failure to attain
agreement between annotators on a multi-class coding scheme, known
as inter-rater reliability in the social sciences (Creswell and Poth, 2016)
has been generally attributed to a flawed coding scheme, rather than the
cognitive challenge of learning the scheme and systematically applying
it over time.
Similarly, for information scientists developing machine learning
models for data analytics, the appreciation of annotation as a psycho­
logical process emerges from the requirement for annotating large
training datasets over an extended period of time, where each judgment
matters. Although human annotation is often regarded as a gold stan­
dard, information scientists have noted that class imbalance leads to
difficulties in appropriately representing the minority class to help
human annotators learn the class concepts (Bröder and Malejka, 2017;
Grant et al., 2017). Information scientists have also observed that
annotation styles affect human annotation quality to factors such as
objectivity and descriptiveness (Cheng and Cosley, 2013). Furthermore,
annotation expertise affects quality, particularly in difficult tasks
(Hansen et al., 2013). Item position with respect to its class concepts
(referred to as “annotation schedule”), cognitive demand, and atten­
tional processes may lead to annotation error (Burghardt et al., 2018).
Missing from both theory and method for human annotation tasks is a
framework to organize and investigate specific human error types in the
annotation tasks of hybrid stream processing systems. Moreover, unlike
purely psychological research, the erroneous annotation of an individual
item has consequences for the machine learning model, which learns to
automate the data annotation process.

The application of the proposed human error framework can be used
to design Human-AI collaboration strategies and improve the perfor­
mance of a human-in-the-loop approach for hybrid stream processing
systems.
2. Background
2.1. Online active learning
To the best of our knowledge, existing types of online active learning
methods focus only on the possible machine/algorithmic errors. Prior
literature (e.g., Almeida et al., 2018; Gama et al., 2014) provides
extensive surveys of the different active learning paradigm-based
methods. The primary categories include one group focused on a bet­
ter sampling of the instance space for querying (e.g., addressing concept
drift Žliobaitė et al., 2014), and another group focused on better
learning of a discriminatory model.
To improve sampling of the instance space, prior research has
explored different mechanisms to drop the outdated/drifted class in­
stances. The simplest way is to consider a fixed window over instance
sequence and sample past instances from that window as they arrive.
Windows can be specified by size and sampling on a first come first serve
basis, or by time and sampling of instances from the last t seconds/mi­
nutes/hours. These approaches do not represent well the characteristics
of a data stream. Hence, alternative approaches were utilized in the past
that uniformly sample and therefore, retain the characteristics of the
underlying incoming stream of instances (Delany et al., 2005; Ng and
Dash, 2008; Salganicoff, 1993; Vitter, 1985; Yao et al., 2012; Zhao et al.,
2011; Žliobaitė, 2011). Other work does not completely drop all past
instances but instead, reduce their weights for updating the classifier by
an age-dependent factor (Helmbold and Long, 1994; Klinkenberg, 2004;
Koren, 2010; Koychev, 2000; 2002).
To improve acquisition of the discriminatory model, prior research
has mainly explored two strategies. The first is called the blind adaptation
strategy, which retrains the model without any detection of changes
(Klinkenberg and Joachims, 2000; Klinkenberg and Renz, 1998; Lan­
quillon, 2001; Widmer and Kubat, 1996). The other way of improving
learning includes an informed strategy, which updates the model
whenever a certain criterion is fulfilled like change detectors (Bifet and
Gavaldá, 2006; Hulten et al., 2001). These criteria can also be aligned
with the adaptation strategy (Gama et al., 2006; Ikonomovska et al.,
2011), called model-integrated detectors.
Our research premise is that the improvement of both types of the
above active learning methods for stream processing systems require
consideration of potential human annotation errors during the querying
process as well, to be efficient and accurate in predictive model learning
for the classifier. For simplicity, our method builds upon the blind
adaptation strategy, which updates the model as we sample the in­
stances in a sequence-based window.

3. Human error framework
Our focus on a human error framework is intended to reveal the
different human reasoning processes that result in erroneous annota­
tions. We assume a preliminary phase of the annotation task where in­
struction provides an initial understanding. However, this preliminary
phase results in a mental representation of the concept (e.g., infra­
structure damage during a disaster) at the beginning of an extended
annotation task that is only partial, in the sense that the changing
boundaries and nuances about a concept are learned while the annota­
tions are performed. We also assume that the annotator can develop a
mental representation of a concept by seeing a sufficient number of
examples of this concept, even in the typical case where the examples
are not annotated a priori.
Following Reason (2000)’s human error taxonomy built on Norman
(1981)’s theory and broadly applied, including the analysis of medical
domain errors (Zhang et al., 2004), we distinguish two classes of errors
for the human annotation task: mistakes and slips. Mistakes result from
the absence of a correct cognitive representation of a concept. Slips are
errors that happen despite acquiring the correct cognitive representation

2.2. Human annotation task and psychological processes
Annotation quality can be affected by many factors. At the most basic
level, a human annotation task can be conceptualized using signal
detection theory (SDT) and its two fundamentally distinct parameters of
discriminability (d’) and decision criterion bias (beta). Discriminability
concerns the relationship between the mean signal strength of the dis­
tributions of positive and negative class instances. Nearly overlapping
distributions pose difficult discrimination, such as using photographs to
distinguish older from younger individuals that are close in age, whereas
the overlap in signals is much smaller for gender discrimination from
photographs (Nguyen et al., 2014). beta in signal detection theory is an
independent parameter, concerning the position of the decision criterion
on these overlapping distributions, dropping it down to be more liberal
to reduce the chance of misses (false negatives) or moving it up to be
more conservative to reduce the chance of false alarms (false positives).
3

R. Pandey et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 160 (2022) 102772

ordering constraints, are particularly vulnerable to a classification
scheme that changes over time and underlying processes of proactive
and retroactive inhibition on knowledge acquisition. As a whole, mis­
takes can be reduced by ordering instances to facilitate learning. This
includes both a sufficient number of examples of each concept presented
and reminders from old concepts, so that the annotator reinforces
persistent and emergent critical distinctions between classes. Because
the observable behavior (erroneous classification) is the same for both
slips and mistakes, but the mitigation is different, the technical chal­
lenge is to identify the mechanism behind the observed error.

of a concept. Based on these broad classes, we present a framework of
human errors in the annotation task for stream processing in Table 1 and
explain the main error types below. We do not claim that all classes of
human errors are equally prevalent or are equally consequential.
3.1. Serial ordering-induced mistakes
The annotation schedule in which the tasks are presented to an
annotator may prevent the annotator from adequately apprehending a
concept, hence introducing mistakes. The main types of mistake include:

3.3. Other influences (temporal and environmental constraints) that
induce mistakes and slips

• Concept not acquired yet: The annotator is asked to annotate an
instance of a class for which s/he has not seen a sufficient number of
examples to learn the concept overall.
• Erroneous concept with missing or extraneous features: At best this
blends categories and at worst creates uncertainty.

As described in the background section, time and environmental
constraints such as workload and its resulting stress during the anno­
tation task can also cause human error. These constraints can cause
vigilance and oversight challenges to the human annotators, causing
slips and potentially, mistakes due to insufficient attention spent on the
example instances to learn the concept. To limit the scope for the first
study on such human annotation framework for stream processing ap­
plications, we do not consider such constraints in the experimentation
and plan to explore these in future work. One of the future explorations
to address such constraints include providing work specification, an
amount of work, and a working environment that is appropriate,
providing pauses to the worker, and so on.
In the following sections, we present three different experimental
frameworks to reason about the existence of human errors and their
mitigation by an algorithm: lab-based, crowdsourcing-based, and
simulation-based. The lab-based error testing framework is similar to the
conventional approach to experimentation in psychology, with greater
control over the annotation task environment; however, a lab-based
framework is difficult to scale to multiple annotators. The
crowdsourcing-based approach can help to remedy the scalability
challenge of the experimental setup. However, it provides less control on
the setup to capture the annotators’ behavior and their unacquired
knowledge. Lastly, the simulation-based approach allows us to generate
the streaming data samples, emulate human errors through an auto­
mated agent (referred ‘oracle’), and demonstrate error mitigation
techniques. However, it may oversimplify observations of the real world
and thus, could not capture the behaviors of all the different human
annotators out there.

3.2. Serial ordering-induced slips
The annotation schedule in which judgments occur may cause slips,
in which the annotator erroneously annotates an instance even if s/he
has a correct representation of its concept. We identify two main cases
for the types of slips:
• Slip favoring an available activated concept: In this case, meta­
cognitive monitoring (vigilance) is suspended, resulting in an
instance label that comes easily to his/her mind. Serial position,
particularly the persisting activation of recent judgments, especially
when reinforced with repetition has the potential to exacerbate slips
that result in a false alarm (false positive).
• Slip ignoring a minimally available concept: The complement of
activation is effective inhibition. In this case, the correct category
does not come to the annotator’s mind, because its activation is too
small compared to other categories. The annotator has not forgotten
the concept, but it is inaccessible, resulting in the application of the
available label instead of the correct one. This results in a miss (false
negative).
Because slips result from activation failures of fundamentally correct
knowledge, concept training is unlikely to help. Both cases result from
extreme local divergence from the base rate or the loss of metacognitive
function, boredom, or fatigue. These can be addressed with proper
annotation schedules.
Both types of errors described above, induced by primarily serial

4. Annotation task for hybrid stream processing systems
A hybrid stream processing application requires human annotation
to adapt and improve the classification model continuously with new
annotated instances. We define the specific annotation task for human
error testing and mitigation to classify an instance from a given
sequence/stream of Twitter instances (tweets) into k classes.
We use labeled datasets from prior work in crisis informatics that
contain labeled tweets related to natural disasters (Alam et al., 2018).
We re-crawled the tweet instances from Twitter’s API for acquiring
metadata such as timestamp and discarded any tweets deleted since the
data were originally collected. The three natural disasters include major
natural hazards affecting Central and North America in 2017 “Hurricane
Harvey, Hurricane Maria, and Hurricane Irma. The labels were created
using a crowdsourcing platform, classifying instances into four major
categories:

Table 1
Framework of human annotation errors in hybrid stream processing applica­
tions. [*empirically studied in this article].
Type of error

Potential cause

Mitigation approach

*Mistakes induced by
serial ordering

• Concept not acquired
yet

*Slips induced by serial
ordering

• Imbalanced presence of
a high-availability
concept or a lowavailability concept
• Concept memory
decayed due to oversight
in rapidly finishing the
annotation task

• Show frequent concept
examples for learning,
potentially informed by
judicious selection such as
near misses
• Limit extreme divergence
from base rate for concept
instances

Mistakes and slips due to
temporal and
environmental
constraints

• Intervene reminders for
concept examples

• workload and stress of the
external environment
causing vigilance
challenges in learning a
concept
• Limit the number of
concepts to annotate or the
number of instances in a
time unit

• infrastructure and utility damage (c1): information about any physical
damage to infrastructure or utilities
• rescue, volunteering, and donation effort (c2): information about of­
fering help through volunteering efforts by a community of users
• affected individuals (c3): information about the condition of the in­
dividuals during this disaster event
4

R. Pandey et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 160 (2022) 102772

• not relevant or cannot judge (c4): instance either does not contain any
informative content or hard to decide.

annotating different class instances.
5.3. Design

We considered human labels with a confidence score (computed by
the crowdsourcing platform for agreement between multiple annotators
(Alam et al., 2018)) greater than 65% for ground truth labeled instances
in our experimentation.

The experiment used an annotation system for the annotation task
defined in Section 4. The input was a sequence of tweet instances for the
Hurricane Harvey disaster. This synthetic input sequence contained in­
stances with a random amount of irrelevant instances (noise) between
ground truth annotated instances of any class to better observe human
memory decay of the class and resulting errors. We added between one
to four irrelevant instances (randomly selected) between each of the
ground truth annotated instances, and they were marked as “not_rele­
vant_or_cant_judge”. Our data stream contained 800 instances.

5. Lab-scale annotation error testing
5.1. Overview
We focus on verifying the effect of decayed memory behavior
(Ebbinghaus, 1913), which underlies the above-mentioned error types
of serial ordering-induced mistakes & slips and impacts the performance
of both human annotation and ML models in the hybrid stream pro­
cessing system.

5.4. Procedure
All annotators were asked to annotate the instances into four class
labels. Three annotators labeled a given instance in the stream sepa­
rately, with no ability to backtrack.

5.1.1. Memory decay curve
Psychologists have been studying memory-decay behavior in the
context of learning and acquiring new knowledge for more than a cen­
tury. The Ebbinghaus Curve “shown in Fig. 2” is a fundamental and
enduring contribution to the study of human memory. We observe from
Fig. 2 an exponential decay of memory retention as the time since first
learning passes. This exponential behavior has been widely observed in
the psychology literature (Brown, 1958; Melton, 1963; Peterson and
Peterson, 1959). Moreover, Loftus (1985) and Anderson and Schooler
(1991) have used an exponential function with respect to time to model
memory decay or retention. Hence, inspired by the Ebbinghaus curve,
we model the decaying score for the memory retention of an annotator
for a particular class (c). Specifically, we model the decaying score for c
by observing how the annotator correctly annotates instances as an
exponential function over time tc lapsed over its last seen annotated
instance. We define the decaying score(c) function in Eq. (1) below:

5.5. Method
Once we collected the three annotators’ responses, we observed
whether or not the annotators reveal memory decay effects for that class.
Given the correct class concept for a given instance, we first store the
time difference since we last observe any previous instance of that class
concept. Moreover, we store the number of annotators who identified
the correct class concept of that given instance. We plot the number of
annotators who correctly identified the class concepts and the time
difference for every instance.
5.6. Results
Fig. 3 shows the plot of how many instances of each class were
correctly identified with respect to the time difference (in steps) be­
tween the appearance of consecutive instances of that class in the data
stream. The size of the circle represents the number of instances that ‘y’
annotators have correctly annotated with ‘x’ time difference since they
last observed that class instance in Fig. 3. Due to the sequential nature of
the experiment, most of the class instances appear in very few (< 10)
steps, and hence, the figure is left-skewed. Moreover, we observe that
many annotators incorrectly annotate the instances despite the class
instances appearing frequently. This shows that multiple other in­
fluences can cause the annotators to make errors as described in Section

(1)

decaying score(c)∝e− tc

Moreover, to compute the probability of human annotators making
an error, we use a function that is a vertical reflection of the afore­
mentioned decaying score(c) function along the x-axis. For our experi­
ments, we assume a parameterized sigmoid function to compute the
annotation error probability given the similar asymptotic nature of the
vertical reflection of the exponential memory decay curves. We define
the error probability score function in Eq. (2) below:
error probability score(c) = γ ×

1
1 + e− αtc +λ

(2)

Here the parameters α, λ, and γ represent different memory decaying
intensities of human annotators. As each human annotator has indi­
vidual memory retention capability, the intensity of making errors in
annotations varies for different human annotators, and hence these
parameters help mimic different human memory decay behavior. For
verifying the above function for human memory decay, we conducted a
small-scale controlled lab study.
5.2. Participants
We selected three students working as Graduate Research Assistants
at an Information Technology research lab on social media research to
volunteer in this study. The participants included one female and two
male students (authors refrained from participation), and all of them
were in the age range of 25–30. These students have been working with
social media mining for more than six months. They have routinely
participated in categorizing social media messages in the past. Hence,
they were well acquainted with social media messages during emer­
gencies and were given a brief training session and clear instructions on

Fig. 2. The effect of memory decay studied in Psychology (Ebbinghaus, 1913)
over time in learning or retaining conceptual knowledge. We investigate such
effects of memory decay on the human annotation quality for hybrid stream
processing systems and corresponding mitigation approaches.
5

R. Pandey et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 160 (2022) 102772

appear. The goal of these crowd-scale experiments is to motivate the
design of algorithms seeking to minimize these errors.
6.2. Participants
We asked ten human judges to annotate six fixed sequences of in­
stances per schedule for two schedules using the crowdsourcing
platform.
6.3. Design
For the crowd-scale experiment, we generated two types of annota­
tion schedules for the task described in Section 4, corresponding to
mistakes and slips. For practical reasons of the cost and time of crowd­
sourcing, we limited the length of the schedules to 20 instances. For
constructing the schedules, we used the labeled data as ground truth,
and based on the labeled data distribution, we chose the minority class
c3 (instances about “affected individuals”) as our target class for error
analysis. The selection of c3 as the target class is used as an example to
create a different annotation schedule because it was appearing the least
in the data distributions, and hence, more prone to error.
For studying slips induced by serial ordering, we examine the case
when instances of a target class (c3) are positioned with a mix of short
and long gaps in the annotation schedule.
We assume that non-uniform and infrequent occurrences cause the
annotators to deactivate the knowledge of the target concept class,
potentially leading to memory decay behavior. Thus, we hypothesize
that the annotation error per position of the target class instance should
increase at the end of the annotation schedule (H1). Similarly, we study
mistakes induced by serial ordering when instances of a target class (c3)
are positioned with equal gaps in an annotation schedule. We observe
the annotation error at each position in the schedule where an instance
of the target class appears. We permute the instances of the target class
on these positions. We hypothesize that uniform and frequent occur­
rences would allow the annotators to acquire the knowledge of the
target class slowly. Thus, we hypothesize that the annotation error per
position of the target class should reduce as we move toward the end of
the annotation schedule (H2).
The first annotation schedule corresponding to slip errors (H1) is {c4,
c1, c2, c3, c1, c3, c4, c1, c4, c1, c4, c2, c1, c4, c1, c2, c4, c2, c4, c3} and
the second schedule corresponding to mistake errors (H2) is {c4, c1, c2,
c1, c4, c2, c1, c4, c3, c1, c2, c4, c3, c1, c2, c1, c3, c2, c4, c4}. The
underlined class label indicates the occurrence of target class instances
and their position for analysis. For the three positions of the target class
(c3) in an annotation schedule, we permuted the instances shown in
those positions, leading to six experimental cases for each type of
schedule.

Fig. 3. The temporal distribution of correct answers by human annotators
shows a similar pattern as Fig. 2 for memory decay behavior. The probability of
incorrect answers (error) increases for annotating a given instance in the
sequence with increased steps between instances of the same concept.

3. However, we also observe that when the time difference between the
class concepts increases, the chance of the annotators correctly identi­
fying the class decreases exponentially and finally tends to zero correct
annotation. In comparison, the highest chance of all the annotators
picking the correct class in annotating an instance is when the time
difference is close to zero.
5.7. Discussion
These results support the quantitative model of memory decay
behavior as described in Section 5.1.1, verifying the exponential nature
of memory decay (ref. Eq. (1)) of annotators as they last see the instance
of a particular class. Hence, we use an exponential function to compute
the memory decay score for each class in our proposed Error-Avoidance
Sampling technique for error mitigation described in Section 7.1.3.
Moreover, as discussed in Section 5.1.1, a parameterized sigmoid-based
error probability function from Eq. (2) can be used to induce an error in
our algorithmic simulation experiments, later on, mimicking the realworld environment for a human annotation task in the stream process­
ing systems. We understand that the number of instances with large time
steps was low. Hence, increasing the number of instances and the
number of annotators would have shown more explicit exponential
behavior of memory decay. Further, we observe a high inter-rater
agreement (0.82 Cohen’s Kappa score) between two of the three anno­
tators, which is higher in comparison with the similar social media
annotation task in the literature (0.68 Cohen’s Kappa score from Zhou
et al., 2021), but the third annotator had low inter-rater agreements
with the other two (0.48 and 0.46 Cohen’s Kappa score respectively).
We also observe that with the increase in time difference, none of the
annotators could correctly identify a class. Within the limitation of the
scalability of a lab-scale study, we still achieve the same exponential
decay behavior widely studied and suggested by the past psychology
literature (Anderson and Schooler, 1991; Loftus, 1985). Furthermore,
our proposed error testing and mitigation approach can use any func­
tion, which closely resembles the vertical reflection properties of the
exponential function and not just the sigmoid function as an
error-inducing function.

6.4. Procedure
We used the Figure Eight platform (now called Appen) to obtain
annotations for each type of experimental case. Initially, each partici­
pant was given a set of example tweet messages for each class label to
train them for the annotation. Next, they were asked to annotate 20
instances into the four labels described in Section 4. For simplicity of the
labeling process, we separated the fourth label described in Section 4
into “not relevant” and “cannot judge” respectively. We specified that
the users should only look at the text while picking the label and not
open any external link. The compensation amount for each task was
$0.15. Figure Eight platform uses several layers of protection to prevent
inattentive workers. It encourages workers to maintain a high reputation
within the system and removes anomalous workers, including auto­
mated responses (“bots”). They also indicated whether the response was
tainted or not in any form, and we only included non-tainted responses.
After filtering all the tainted responses, we extracted a total of 120 re­
sponses for the two schedules. The reason for collecting many responses

6. Crowd-scale annotation error testing
6.1. Overview
Our crowdsourcing-based experiments seek to measure the preva­
lence of both mistakes and slips, and the conditions under which these
6

R. Pandey et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 160 (2022) 102772

average of the earlier two positions in the case of some annotations (pvalue of 0.07). However, it is a major challenge to model the acquisition
of knowledge for a concept due to a lack of information on the prior
knowledge or experience level of the annotators, and hence, we could
not validate the hypothesis made for the error type mistakes. We discuss
these limitations in Section 8. Motivated by these promising results, we
next describe large-scale simulations and algorithmic solutions to miti­
gate such human errors in the HITL-ML paradigm-based stream pro­
cessing applications focusing on slips due to potential memory decay.

from the crowdsourcing platform is to avoid the chances of other kinds
of error influences such as inattentiveness, workload, and stress to
overpower the cause of serial-ordering-based errors due to our proposed
schedules.
6.5. Method
With the Figure Eight platform, we could not enforce participants to
participate in only one experiment. Therefore, we filtered out the re­
sponses from participants who have participated in multiple experi­
ments. As a result, after filtering, we got 44 responses for the slips-based
annotation schedule and 38 responses for the mistakes-based annotation
schedule, respectively. Once we filtered out the responses from dupli­
cate participants (who participated in multiple experiments), we
analyzed the responses on both types of annotation schedules. We
extracted annotations of the target positions for each response and
checked if the annotators had incorrectly labeled to any class label other
than c3. If incorrectly labeled, we considered the error score as one, else
zero. We accumulated error scores from all the responses made at first,
second, and third positions, respectively. Next, we took the union of the
errors made at the first and second positions and compared this with the
third position’s error using statistical significance testing.

7. Simulation-based error testing and mitigation
We simulate the annotation task in an active learning paradigm for
online stream processing (Žliobaitė et al., 2014). We design a novel
method for generating a dynamic annotation schedule (instance sam­
pling and ordering) for an annotator (simulated “oracle”) such that the
schedule attempts to minimize human errors (Serial Ordering-induced
Slips) and maximize the overall performance of the active learning
paradigm.
7.1. Mitigation algorithms
Our method first samples a batch of m instances from a time interval
[ti , ti+1 ) by using a conventional uncertainty sampling algorithm for an
active learning paradigm, followed by applying constraints to select only
n (n < m) instances for annotation that minimize the potential human
memory decaying error, and then, update the machine learning model
for predictions in the next time interval [ti+1 , ti+2 ). For annotations by
“oracle” in the simulation, we use ground truth labels (c.f. Section 4)
along with the memory decay to simulate human errors (explained later
in Section 7.3). We propose three types of algorithms (the first two being
the baselines) based on diverse sampling strategies for selecting in­
stances to annotate at the end of time interval [ti , ti+1 ):

6.6. Results
Table 2 shows the results of crowdsourcing for the micro-average
error rate (average error by an annotator for a given target instance)
at the positions of the target class in the schedule. We note inverse
functions for the position effect on the potential knowledge acquisition
and human error, depending upon the manipulation. The high microaverage error rate at the third position for slip error type supports the
distinction with respect to the placement of the target instance. We also
ran a paired two-tailed t-test to observe any statistically significant
difference between the errors of the specific positions. For the slip
errors-based annotation schedule (H1), we observe t(43) = − 2.20 with
p-value of 0.03 < 0.05, whereas we observe t(37) = 1.87 with p-value of
0.07 > 0.05 for the mistake errors-based annotation schedule (H2).

7.1.1. (Baseline) Algorithm 1: random sampling
We randomly sample n instances from the batch of m streamed in­
stances in the recent interval of [ti , ti+1 ). We hypothesize that random
sampling can address the issue of data distribution changes for concept
drift by selecting an instance from any region in the concept space,
although it may be inefficient to improve learning performance over
time. For consistency, we use an equal number of samples for this al­
gorithm to the number of instances sampled by the popular active
learning paradigm of uncertainty sampling, as described next.

6.7. Discussion
From the paired two-tailed t-test results mentioned above, we found
a significant difference (p-value = 0.03) for the error between the last
position and the average of the earlier two positions in a sequence that
depicts slips due to potentially memory decay of the knowledge of the
target class. This shows that a significant gap with no occurrences of a
class indeed increases annotation errors for that class and suggests
frequent reminders of the concept/class are needed in a sequence for
annotation tasks, and hence, the hypothesis H1 made for slips error was
accepted. Whereas, with due to the low degree of freedom (37) and pvalue of 0.07 > 0.05, we cannot accept or reject the hypothesis H2 as we
cannot rule out a difference between the error at the last position and the

7.1.2. (Baseline) Algorithm 2: uncertainty sampling
We predict the classes of the incoming batch of instances with the
current active learning algorithmic model. At the start of the time in­
terval of [ti ,ti+1 ), along with the new incoming instances, we also receive
a model, which was trained with all the annotated instances before ti .
We use this model for prediction. After prediction, we select the classi­
fied instances with uncertainty in the prediction confidence – proba­
bility in the range of [30%, 70%]. We provide the uncertainty region
instances to the oracle and obtain its annotations. We hypothesize that
the model will become more robust if it starts learning from the cases on
the decision boundary region (Winston and Brown, 1984).

Table 2
Annotation errors in the three positions of the target class instance (c.f.
description in Section 6), observed after 44 and 38 filtered crowdsourced re­
sponses on two types of annotation schedule respectively. The p-value indicates
the statistical significance for the difference between the error at the third
studied position in comparison to the union of the errors at first and second
positions.
Error
type

Potential cause

1st position
error

2nd
position
error

3rd
position
error

pvalue

Slip

decayed
knowledge
unacquired
knowledge

0.32

0.18

0.48

0.03

0.13

0.25

0.18

0.07

Mistake

7.1.3. (Proposed) Algorithm 3: error-avoidance sampling
This algorithm relies on uncertainty sampling to first select candi­
date instances from uncertain regions. It then discards the instances
whose predicted class (from the model received at time ti ) could either
add noise to the new model or tend to be forgotten by the oracle (i.e.,
memory decay in human learning behavior toward that class). The
algorithmic flow is formally described in Fig. 4.
Specifically, at the beginning of each interval [ti ,ti+1 ), we receive four
information components described below:
7

R. Pandey et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 160 (2022) 102772

Fig. 4. Summary of the proposed Error-Avoidance Sampling-based human error mitigation algorithm. At every interval, the streaming model predicts the potential
class labels with uncertainty. The uncertain instances and instances of the discarded class label are filtered out, and the remaining are annotated by the oracle, which
mimics the memory decay of human annotators. Based on the new annotations, the streaming model is updated, and the next class concept to discard is computed to
avoid human errors in the annotation.

– Incoming Instances. All incoming streams of instances at time in­
terval ti shown by a string of tweet symbols in Fig. 4.
– Model. Streaming active learning model, which is trained with all
the instances that are annotated by the oracle before ti .
– Error Matrix. This is a matrix that contains information about each
instance annotated by the oracle from the previous two intervals (i.
e., [ti− 2 , ti− 1 ) and [ti− 1 ,ti )) and the current interval (i.e., [ti ,ti+1 )). Each
row in the matrix represents an annotated instance and contains
information about its arrival time, annotated class by the oracle, and
the set of per-class prediction error. The per-class prediction error for
a class is the average error of predictions for the annotated instances
of the class present in the current error matrix, and it is computed
using the active learning model updated with the current instance.
For example, if an instance X has been annotated with class c3 by the
oracle at time tX , we store the values X, tX , and c3 to the error matrix.
In addition, we also have column information for per-class prediction
⃒
error as E(ci ⃒cj ) where iϵ[1, num class], jϵ[1, num class], and i ∕
= j. In
⃒
our case num class = 4. In this example, all values of E(ci ⃒cj ) for iϵ[1,

score (explained below) and then, choose the class which has the
highest final score.
Algorithm steps. We now go through the flow of our proposed algo­
rithm summarized in Fig. 4 and refer to corresponding functions and
variables in parenthesis. First, for each instance X (represented by a
tweet symbol in Fig. 4), we predict its class based on our current model
received at ti . Second, we select the instances that are in the uncertain
region (dark-colored tweet symbols) and are not predicted with the class
that is Cdiscarded . We believe that at each interval, Cdiscarded represents a
class whose instances cause error in the active learning model. Third, we
schedule the selected instances for annotation by the oracle and update
our model (UpdateModel function). Finally, we update the error matrix
by adding a row for instance X, and storing values as per the error matrix
definition.
To decide which class to discard, we compute two scores: error
avoidance score and decay score. The error avoidance score determines
the total error induced in the model for other classes due to the addition
of the current instance into its training set. While the decay score de­
termines the class that appears with excessive frequency in the stream,
causing memory decay for other classes and thus, leads to annotation
error. Note that we use the error matrix to decide the classes to discard
only after the first three intervals.
We calculate the error avoidance score for each class cj (jϵ[1, 4]) as:

4] and jϵ{1, 2, 4} are copied from the previous row to the current row
for time tX , as the current instance that has arrived is annotated with
class c3 (i.e., j = 3). Next we calculate E(ci |c3) for iϵ[1, 4].
For computing E(ci |c3) at time tX , we predict all previous instances
in the error matrix with the updated active learning model (retrained with the annotated instance X). Next, we calculate the perclass F-measure (F measure(ci )) where the annotated class is
considered as true class to compare with the predicted class, and
thus, we compute per-class prediction error (1 − F measure(ci )).
Finally, we get the per-class prediction error E(ci |c3) for each class ci
in the final row of the error matrix for the instance X. This error
matrix helps in determining a class to discard as explained next.
– Discarded Class (Cdiscarded ). This represents the class that has
induced the most errors to the other classes or whose instances
appear very frequently, causing memory decay for instances of other
classes. To identify the discarded class Cdiscarded , we first compute the
error avoidance score and decay score for each class to get its final

m ∑
n
( ) ∑
GetErrorAvoidanceScore cj =
Ek,(ci ,cj )
k=0

(3)

i=0

where k is the total number of instances in the error matrix.
Next, we calculate the memory decay score to determine which class
appears too frequently in the stream. For each class cj , we calculate the
score as:
( )
GetDecayScore cj = e− ΔTj
(4)
where ΔTj is the time difference from the recent two occurrences of the
8

R. Pandey et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 160 (2022) 102772

Fig. 5. AUC score of mitigation algorithms for three hurricane datasets by various decay settings, showing superior performance of the proposed error-avoidance
sampling in the case of memory decay errors.

instances of class cj in the error matrix. Note that the GetDecayScore
function is a simplified version of the decaying score function defined in
Eq. (1). We have not parametrized this function as we generalize this
decaying factor the same for all humans. Hence the memory decay score
only depends on the time since the last viewed class instance irrespective
of the different decaying intensities of different humans. Additionally,
we observe that the memory decay score for any class is reset every time
that class instance gets picked for annotation. Moreover, as the time
difference increases, the decay score decreases exponentially similar to
the behavior of memory decay in psychology, which has been discussed
in the lab-scale experiment in Section 5.
Lastly, the final score for each class cj is defined as:
( )
( )
Scorecj = GetErrorAvoidanceScore cj × GetDecayScore cj
(5)

randomly picked n instances (n = 20) of each class to create a warm-up
set; the rest constitutes the training set. As we have a class imbalance in
our data, we use an equal number of instances across classes for creating
our warm-up phase model for robustness. The training data are sorted
based on the arrival time of an instance (tweet) in the stream. After
sorting, we divided the data into equal bins of size N. At each interval, N
instances would arrive for annotation and get filtered for inclusion in the
training set based on our mitigation algorithms.
We fix N based on volume as our labeled dataset is not continuous in
a real-time setting but is distributed over an extended period, given it
was annotated through a crowdsourcing method in prior work. Hence,
we cannot fix N based on time units (seconds, minutes, etc.), but our
approach is generic and applicable for other scenarios.

Once we calculate the final score for each class, we determine the
class cj with the highest score as the error-inducing class to discard
(GetDiscardedClass function). We observe that while choosing the dis­
carded class at each interval, we are not only looking for the memory
decay factor but also the input text of the instance and the effect it has on
the model performance for other class labels.

7.3. Active learning environment
We implement the active learning paradigm following previous work
(Žliobaitė et al., 2014). First, we train the base model with the warm-up
set and then, keep updating with the new incoming instances sampled by
our baseline or proposed algorithms.
We used a fairly standard set-up for text classification, using pre­
trained GloVe-Twitter embeddings (Pennington et al., 2014) with 200
dimensions for generating word-level features and then averaging the
word-level embeddings to represent tweet-level features. We train a
linear SVM model and measure the performance on the fixed test set.
For every interval ti , we receive N instances for seeking the annotator
feedback to acquire more labeled data for retraining the current model.
Depending upon the mitigation algorithms, i.e. Random, Uncertainty, or
Error-Avoidance Sampling; we sample the instances to obtain annota

7.2. Simulation experiments
We describe the data preparation for the simulated stream processing
task and the active learning paradigm.
Data preparation We use labeled datasets from three major hurricanes
in Central and North America as described in Section 4. We split the data
into training, test, and warm-up sets. Twenty percent of the whole
dataset is used as a test set. From the remaining 80% of the data, we
9

R. Pandey et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 160 (2022) 102772

tions from the oracle. To mimic human behavior, the label for the
instance given by the oracle annotator is not always correct. Based on
the lab-scale experiment’s discussion in Section 5, we note that the error
probability score for annotators making errors in annotation can be
depicted using a parameterized sigmoid function in our annotation task.
Thus, we utilize the value of a sigmoid function with different param­
eters to find the probability that the oracle generates a correct or erro­
neous label due to memory decay of the class as given in the formulation
of Eq. (2). We define the “Memory Decay” component in Fig. 4 precisely
to the oracle to highlight this memory decay behavior of the oracle. We
use 3 different parameter settings to add errors through the memory
decay behavior of the oracle (annotator):

constantly updates the model with new training data that gradually
improves on the test set.
In the case of our error-avoidance sampling-based algorithm, the
chances of inducing human error decrease due to accounting for the
likelihood of memory decay of the knowledge about a class, which at­
tempts to reduce the expected errors in annotating instances of all
classes. Through the GetDecayScore function in Eq. (4), we give more
weight to the class to discard whose instances are appearing more often
in the streaming data. Hence, those class instances will be discarded in
the next period so that the annotators do not forget the other classes that
are appearing less frequently. Moreover, as the GetDecayScore function is
independent in our proposed algorithm, it can take any memory decay
function making our error-avoidance sampling-based algorithm generic.
In summary, our study of human error types in the annotation of
streaming data presents novel insights on their effect on the perfor­
mance of active learning systems in the (HITL-ML) paradigm-based
stream processing systems. This study raises awareness of instance
ordering when designing crowdsourcing-based tasks. In particular, we
recommend using an annotation schedule in an active learning
paradigm-based system that can help reduce human errors. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate a principled
framework for quantifying human annotation errors for social stream
processing and develop mitigation methods by better understanding the
human annotation task as a psychological process.

1) Slow decaying: computes a sigmoid function with parameters esti­
mated from errors observed in the crowd experiment: α = 0.0434, λ
= 0.9025, and γ = 0.75.
2) Fast decaying: uses a sigmoid function that converges to 1 faster
than the slow decaying and induces errors more frequently: α = 0.03,
λ = 1.00, and γ = 1.00.
3) No decaying: assumes that our oracle always gives the correct labels
and does not have any memory decay of the knowledge of any class.
Hence, we use the true ground truth labels for each annotation.
7.4. Results
We experimented across three event datasets for a robust evaluation
of our simulation algorithms. These event datasets have a varying
number of instances per interval: Hurricane Harvey has N = 36, Irma
has N = 59, and Maria has N = 18. Therefore, our results have taken
into account the different burstiness of the streaming data instances
during the real disaster event. We report the AUC scores for every
experiment on the fixed test set per event. Fig. 5 shows the AUC scores of
our three mitigation algorithms using different decay behavior settings
of the oracle annotator, across all three datasets. We computed the micro
average of the AUC scores at each time interval for different mitigation
settings as the model is trained differently on each of them. The be­
haviors of accuracy and F-measure follow a similar pattern to those of
AUC, thus, we omit those figures for brevity; however, they are included
in the supplementary materials for transparency. The results demon­
strate the effectiveness of our proposed annotation scheduling approach
in contrast to the two baselines for mitigating annotation errors, and
thus, improve the automatic classification performance.

8. Conclusions
We defined a framework of human errors, including mistakes and
slips in the context of stream processing, based on psychological theories
of human errors. We specifically focused on a quantitative model of
memory decay behavior in the context of annotation tasks of humans,
given that it is a common cause for both mistakes and slips. We validated
the existence of memory decay-based annotation errors in a variety of
experimental setups from lab-scale to crowdsourcing and provided ev­
idence for the conceptual distinction between slips and mistakes for
stream processing applications. We performed simulation-based studies
to test a novel error mitigation algorithm targeted to slips that minimizes
the likelihood of memory decay in an active learning paradigm-based
human annotation task. The proposed method for human error mitiga­
tion can help design Human-AI collaboration systems for efficient
stream processing for social media and web data in general. Such sys­
tems would require not only fewer human annotations but also reduce
errors and decrease annotator memory decay.
Limitations and future work. We have provided a proof-of-concept
using an over-simplified model of human memory (Anderson, 2000).
In particular, we have simplified the activation and decay functions and
the self-reinforcing effect of classification on persisting knowledge of
class concepts in an annotation task. Different error probability score
functions other than sigmoid may better model the memory decay
behavior of humans. Our approach to the characterization of human
annotation error is also focused on cognition and ignorant of exogenous
influences on cognition, including the physical and social environment
(Hollnagel, 1998). We do not claim that this study covers all types of
human annotation errors in stream processing, in particular, the
knowledge modification problem posed by changes in streaming con­
tent. In focusing on serial effects, we have ignored the effect of absolute
time.
Our small crowd-scale study provided insufficient power to defini­
tively distinguish the mistake-based error. A future large-scale crowd­
sourced study could provide more definitive support for the
effectiveness of our proposed error mitigation algorithm. Nevertheless,
we have documented that blind confidence in human annotation as a
gold standard is gravely erroneous. Dramatic performance improvement
results when the annotation is utilized with an appreciation for the
human processes that generated it and might lead to errors. We hope
that our framework provides a foundation for studying diverse types of

7.5. Discussion
We mimicked a real-world annotation scenario by inducing different
types of memory decay-based human errors (slow vs. fast decaying) in a
simulated annotation schedule. The error mitigation algorithm based on
our error-avoidance sampling technique can select instances for a
human to annotate, which mitigates the effect of human memory decay
and improves AUC scores over time across all the event datasets, despite
varying numbers of instances per interval. Also, for the first three in­
tervals, both the simple uncertainty-based and error-avoidance sam­
pling-based algorithms are equivalent in performance during the initial
time. This is consistent with an interpretation in which our algorithm
may still be learning about the class that induces errors to other classes
or make other classes forgotten by the annotator. Both of these algo­
rithms show a gradual increment of performance as the new instances
arrive, compared to the random sampling algorithm with highly variant
behavior of the learning model. These observations support the claim
that our proposed algorithm could help improve active learning
paradigm-based real-time systems.
In the case of a no-decaying simulation setting, where the oracle
always (but unrealistically) provides the correct label, all mitigation
algorithms perform similarly to each other. This is possible due to
similarity in frequency and the amount of correct oracle feedback, which
10

R. Pandey et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 160 (2022) 102772

annotation errors and causes, beyond text to image object recognition
for a variety of stream processing applications, such as addressing
burnout or inattentive worker errors in the future for human-AI teaming.
Reproducibility. Human annotations and code implementations are
available upon request for research purposes.

Ebbinghaus, H., 1913. Memory: A Contribution to Experimental Psychology, vol. 3.
Teachers College, Columbia University.
Gama, J., Fernandes, R., Rocha, R., 2006. Decision trees for mining data streams. Intell.
Data Anal. 10 (1), 23–45. https://doi.org/10.3233/IDA-2006-10103.Publisher: IOS
Press
Gama, J., Žliobaitė, I., Bifet, A., Pechenizkiy, M., Bouchachia, A., 2014. A survey on
concept drift adaptation. ACM Comput. Surv. 46 (4), 44:1–44:37. https://doi.org/
10.1145/2523813.
Grant, M.J., Button, C.M., Snook, B., 2017. An evaluation of interrater reliability
measures on binary tasks using d-prime. Appl. Psychol. Meas. 41 (4), 264–276.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0146621616684584.Publisher: SAGE Publications Inc
Hansen, D.L., Schone, P.J., Corey, D., Reid, M., Gehring, J., 2013. Quality control
mechanisms for crowdsourcing: peer review, arbitration, & expertise at familysearch
indexing. Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work. Association for Computing Machinery, San Antonio, Texas, USA, pp. 649–660.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2441776.2441848.
Helmbold, D.P., Long, P.M., 1994. Tracking drifting concepts by minimizing
disagreements. Mach. Learn. 14 (1), 27–45. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00993161.
Hollnagel, E., 1998. Cognitive Reliability and Error Analysis Method (CREAM). Elsevier.
Hulten, G., Spencer, L., Domingos, P., 2001. Mining time-changing data streams.
Proceedings of the Seventh ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining. Association for Computing Machinery, San Francisco,
California, pp. 97–106. https://doi.org/10.1145/502512.502529.
Ikonomovska, E., Gama, J., Džeroski, S., 2011. Learning model trees from evolving data
streams. Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 23 (1), 128–168. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10618-010-0201-y.
Imran, M., Lykourentzou, I., Naudet, Y., Castillo, C., 2013. Engineering crowdsourced
stream processing systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1310.5463.
Jacoby, L.L., Hessels, S., Bopp, K., 2001. Proactive and retroactive effects in memory
performance: dissociating recollection and accessibility bias. The Nature of
Remembering: Essays in Honor of Robert G. Crowder. American Psychological
Association, Washington, DC, US, pp. 35–54. https://doi.org/10.1037/10394-003.
Kahneman, D., Tversky, A., 1979. Prospect theory: an analysis of decision under risk.
Econometrica 47 (2), 263–291. https://doi.org/10.2307/1914185.Publisher:
[Wiley, Econometric Society]. https://www.jstor.org/stable/1914185
Klinkenberg, R., 2004. Learning drifting concepts: example selection vs. example
weighting. Intell. Data Anal. 8 (3), 281–300.
Klinkenberg, R., Joachims, T., 2000. Detecting concept drift with support vector
machines. ICML, pp. 487–494.
Klinkenberg, R., Renz, I., 1998. Adaptive information filtering: learning in the presence
of concept drifts. Learning for text Categorization, pp. 33–40.
Koren, Y., 2010. Collaborative filtering with temporal dynamics. Commun. ACM 53 (4),
89–97. https://doi.org/10.1145/1721654.1721677.
Koychev, I., 2000. Gradual Forgetting for Adaptation to Concept DriftURL: https://resea
rch.uni-sofia.bg/handle/10506/57. Accepted: 2008-01-18T15:13:52Z Publisher:
Proceedings of ECAI 2000 Workshop on Current Issues in Spatio-Temporal
Reasoning.
Koychev, I., 2002. Tracking changing user interests through prior-learning of context. In:
De Bra, P., Brusilovsky, P., Conejo, R. (Eds.), Adaptive Hypermedia and Adaptive
Web-Based Systems. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 223–232. https://doi.org/
10.1007/3-540-47952-X_24.
Lanquillon, C., 2001. Enhancing text classification to improve information filtering.
Lofi, C., Maarry, K.E., 2014. Design patterns for hybrid algorithmic-crowdsourcing
workflows. 2014 IEEE 16th Conference on Business Informatics, vol. 1, pp. 1–8.
https://doi.org/10.1109/CBI.2014.16.ISSN: 2378-1971
Loftus, G.R., 1985. Evaluating forgetting curves. J. Exp. Psychol. 11 (2), 397.
Mackworth, N.H., 1948. The breakdown of vigilance during prolonged visual search.
Q. J. Exp. Psychol. 1 (1), 6–21. https://doi.org/10.1080/17470214808416738.
Publisher: Routledge eprint:
Marshall, C.C., Shipman, F.M., 2013. Experiences surveying the crowd: reflections on
methods, participation, and reliability. Proceedings of the 5th Annual ACM Web
Science Conference. Association for Computing Machinery, Paris, France,
pp. 234–243. https://doi.org/10.1145/2464464.2464485.
Melton, A.W., 1963. Implications of short-term memory for a general theory of memory.
J. Verbal Learn. Verbal Behav. 2 (1), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5371
(63)80063-8.https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022537
163800638
Murdock Jr., B.B., 1962. The serial position effect of free recall. J. Exp. Psychol. 64 (5),
482.
Ng, W., Dash, M., 2008. A test paradigm for detecting changes in transactional data
streams. In: Haritsa, J.R., Kotagiri, R., Pudi, V. (Eds.), Database Systems for
Advanced Applications. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 204–219. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-540-78568-2_17.
Nguyen, D., Trieschnigg, D., Doğruöz, A.S., Gravel, R., Theune, M., Meder, T., de
Jong, F., 2014. Why gender and age prediction from tweets is hard: lessons from a
crowdsourcing experiment. Proceedings of COLING 2014, the 25th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics: Technical Papers. Dublin City University
and Association for Computational Linguistics, Dublin, Ireland, pp. 1950–1961. htt
ps://www.aclweb.org/anthology/C14-1184.https://www.aclweb.org/anthology
/C14-1184
Norman, D.A., 1981. Categorization of action slips. Psychol. Rev. 88 (1), 1.
Olteanu, A., Vieweg, S., Castillo, C., 2015. What to expect when the unexpected happens:
social media communications across crises. Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing. Association for
Computing Machinery, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp. 994–1009. https://doi.org/
10.1145/2675133.2675242.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Rahul Pandey: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation,
Writing – original draft, Visualization. Hemant Purohit: Conceptuali­
zation, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – original
draft, Funding acquisition. Carlos Castillo: Conceptualization, Formal
analysis, Validation, Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Valerie L.
Shalin: Investigation, Resources, Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
Purohit thanks U.S. National Science Foundation grant awards IIS1657379 and 1815459, and Castillo thanks the funding received from
the “la Caixa” Foundation (ID 100010434), under the agreement LCF/
PR/PR16/51110009 by the HUMAINT program (Human Behavior and
Machine Intelligence), Joint Research Centre, European Commission for
partial support to this research. The opinions expressed are those of the
authors and do not reflect those of the sponsors.
Supplementary material
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in
the online version, at 10.1016/j.ijhcs.2022.102772
References
Alam, F., Ofli, F., Imran, M., 2018. CrisisMMD: multimodal Twitter datasets from natural
disasters. Twelfth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media.https:
//www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICWSM/ICWSM18/paper/view/17816
Almeida, P.R.L., Oliveira, L.S., Britto, A.S., Sabourin, R., 2018. Adapting dynamic
classifier selection for concept drift. Expert Syst. Appl. 104, 67–85. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.eswa.2018.03.021.http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0957417418301611
Anderson, J.R., 2000. Learning and Memory: An integrated Approach. John Wiley &
Sons Inc.
Anderson, J.R., Schooler, L.J., 1991. Reflections of the environment in memory. Psychol.
Sci. 2 (6), 396–408.
Bifet, A., Gavaldá, R., 2006. Kalman filters and adaptive windows for learning in data
streams. In: Todorovski, L., Lavrač, N., Jantke, K.P. (Eds.), Discovery Science.
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 29–40. https://doi.org/10.1007/11893318_7.
Brown, J., 1958. Some tests of the decay theory of immediate memory. Q. J. Exp.
Psychol. 10 (1), 12–21. https://doi.org/10.1080/17470215808416249.Publisher:
SAGE Publications
Bröder, A., Malejka, S., 2017. On a problematic procedure to manipulate response biases
in recognition experiments: the case of implied base rates. Memory 25 (6), 736–743.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09658211.2016.1214735.Publisher: Routledge _eprint:
Burghardt, K., Hogg, T., Lerman, K., 2018. Quantifying the impact of cognitive biases in
question-answering systems. Twelfth International AAAI Conference on Web and
Social Media.https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICWSM/ICWSM18/paper/vi
ew/17797
Castillo, C., 2016. Big Crisis Data: Social Media in Disasters and Time-Critical Situations.
Cambridge University Press.Google-Books-ID: qNqgDAAAQBAJ
Cheng, J., Cosley, D., 2013. How annotation styles influence content and preferences.
Proceedings of the 24th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Social Media. Association
for Computing Machinery, Paris, France, pp. 214–218. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2481492.2481519.
Creswell, J.W., Poth, C.N., 2016. Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design: Choosing
Among Five Approaches. SAGE Publications.Google-Books-ID: DLbBDQAAQBAJ
Delany, S.J., Cunningham, P., Tsymbal, A., Coyle, L., 2005. A case-based technique for
tracking concept drift in spam filtering. In: Macintosh, A., Ellis, R., Allen, T. (Eds.),
Applications and Innovations in Intelligent Systems XII. Springer, London, pp. 3–16.
https://doi.org/10.1007/1-84628-103-2_1.

11

R. Pandey et al.

International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 160 (2022) 102772
Tulving, E., Pearlstone, Z., 1966. Availability versus accessibility of information in
memory for words. J. Verbal Learn. Verbal Behav. 5 (4), 381–391. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0022-5371(66)80048-8.http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0022537166800488
Vitter, J.S., 1985. Random sampling with a reservoir. ACM Trans. Math. Softw. 11 (1),
37–57. https://doi.org/10.1145/3147.3165.
Widmer, G., Kubat, M., 1996. Learning in the presence of concept drift and hidden
contexts. Mach. Learn. 23 (1), 69–101. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1018046501280.
Wiener, E.L., 1987. Application of vigilance research: rare, medium, or well done? Hum.
Factors 29 (6), 725–736. https://doi.org/10.1177/001872088702900611.Publisher:
SAGE Publications Inc
Winston, P.H., Brown, R.H., 1984. Artificial Intelligence: An MIT Perspective. MIT Press.
Yao, R., Shi, Q., Shen, C., Zhang, Y., van den Hengel, A., 2012. Robust tracking with
weighted online structured learning. In: Fitzgibbon, A., Lazebnik, S., Perona, P.,
Sato, Y., Schmid, C. (Eds.), Computer Vision - ECCV 2012. Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg, pp. 158–172. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-33712-3_12.
Zhang, J., Patel, V.L., Johnson, T.R., Shortliffe, E.H., 2004. A cognitive taxonomy of
medical errors. J. Biomed. Inform. 37 (3), 193–204. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jbi.2004.04.004.http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1532046
404000528
Zhao, P., Hoi, S.C.H., Jin, R., Yang, T., 2011. Online AUC maximization. Proceedings of
the 28th International Conference on Machine Learning ICML 2011: Bellevue, WA,
June 28–July 2, pp. 233–240.https://ink.library.smu.edu.sg/sis_research/2351
Zhou, C., Xiu, H., Wang, Y., Yu, X., 2021. Characterizing the dissemination of
misinformation on social media in health emergencies: an empirical study based on
COVID-19. Inf. Process. Manag. 58 (4), 102554. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ipm.2021.102554.https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306457
321000583
Žliobaitė, I., 2011. Combining similarity in time and space for training set formation
under concept drift. Intell. Data Anal. 15 (4), 589–611. https://doi.org/10.3233/
IDA-2011-0484.Publisher: IOS Press
Žliobaitė, I., Bifet, A., Pfahringer, B., Holmes, G., 2014. Active learning with drifting
streaming data. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 25 (1), 27–39. https://doi.
org/10.1109/TNNLS.2012.2236570.Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks and Learning Systems

Pandey, R., Castillo, C., Purohit, H., 2019. Modeling human annotation errors to design
bias-aware systems for social stream processing. Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining.
Association for Computing Machinery, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada,
pp. 374–377. https://doi.org/10.1145/3341161.3342931.
Pennington, J., Socher, R., Manning, C., 2014. Glove: global vectors for word
representation. Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP). Association for Computational Linguistics, Doha,
Qatar, pp. 1532–1543. https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/D14-1162.https://www.aclweb.
org/anthology/D14-1162
Peterson, L., Peterson, M.J., 1959. Short-term retention of individual verbal items.
J. Exp. Psychol. 58 (3), 193–198. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0049234.Place: US
Publisher: American Psychological Association
Purohit, H., Castillo, C., Imran, M., Pandey, R., 2018. Ranking of social media alerts with
workload bounds in emergency operation centers. 2018 IEEE/WIC/ACM
International Conference on Web Intelligence (WI), pp. 206–213. https://doi.org/
10.1109/WI.2018.00-88.
Purohit, H., Castillo, C., Imran, M., Pandey, R., 2018. Social-EOC: serviceability model to
rank social media requests for emergency operation centers. 2018 IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining
(ASONAM), pp. 119–126. https://doi.org/10.1109/ASONAM.2018.8508709.ISSN:
2473-991X
Reason, J., 2000. Human error: models and management. BMJ 320 (7237), 768–770.
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.320.7237.768.Publisher: British Medical Journal
Publishing Group Section: Education and debate. URL: https://www.bmj.com/c
ontent/320/7237/768
Salganicoff, M., 1993. Density-adaptive learning and forgetting. Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc., Amherst, MA, USA, pp. 276–283.
Shirky, C., 2008. It’s not information overload. It’s filter failure. Web. September.
Sutton, J., League, C., Sellnow, T.L., Sellnow, D.D., 2015. Terse messaging and public
health in the midst of natural disasters: the case of the boulder floods. Health
Commun. 30 (2), 135–143. https://doi.org/10.1080/10410236.2014.974124.
Publisher: Routledge _eprint:

12

