Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-020-00287-7

An open source machine learning framework for
efficient and transparent systematic reviews
Rens van de Schoot 1 ✉, Jonathan de Bruin 2, Raoul Schram2, Parisa Zahedi 2, Jan de Boer 3,
Felix Weijdema 3, Bianca Kramer 3, Martijn Huijts 4, Maarten Hoogerwerf 2,
Gerbrich Ferdinands 1, Albert Harkema 1, Joukje Willemsen 1, Yongchao Ma 1, Qixiang Fang
Sybren Hindriks1, Lars Tummers 5 and Daniel L. Oberski 1,6

,

1

To help researchers conduct a systematic review or meta-analysis as efficiently and transparently as possible, we designed a
tool to accelerate the step of screening titles and abstracts. For many tasks—including but not limited to systematic reviews
and meta-analyses—the scientific literature needs to be checked systematically. Scholars and practitioners currently screen
thousands of studies by hand to determine which studies to include in their review or meta-analysis. This is error prone and
inefficient because of extremely imbalanced data: only a fraction of the screened studies is relevant. The future of systematic
reviewing will be an interaction with machine learning algorithms to deal with the enormous increase of available text. We
therefore developed an open source machine learning-aided pipeline applying active learning: ASReview. We demonstrate by
means of simulation studies that active learning can yield far more efficient reviewing than manual reviewing while providing
high quality. Furthermore, we describe the options of the free and open source research software and present the results from
user experience tests. We invite the community to contribute to open source projects such as our own that provide measurable
and reproducible improvements over current practice.

W

ith the emergence of online publishing, the number
of scientific manuscripts on many topics is skyrocketing1. All of these textual data present opportunities to
scholars and practitioners while simultaneously confronting them
with new challenges. Scholars often develop systematic reviews and
meta-analyses to develop comprehensive overviews of the relevant
topics2. The process entails several explicit and, ideally, reproducible steps, including identifying all likely relevant publications in a
standardized way, extracting data from eligible studies and synthesizing the results. Systematic reviews differ from traditional literature reviews in that they are more replicable and transparent3,4. Such
systematic overviews of literature on a specific topic are pivotal not
only for scholars, but also for clinicians, policy-makers, journalists
and, ultimately, the general public5–7.
Given that screening the entire research literature on a given
topic is too labour intensive, scholars often develop quite narrow
searches. Developing a search strategy for a systematic review is
an iterative process aimed at balancing recall and precision8,9; that
is, including as many potentially relevant studies as possible while
simultaneously limiting the total number of studies retrieved. The
vast number of publications in the field of study often leads to a
relatively precise search, with the risk of missing relevant studies.
The process of systematic reviewing is error prone and extremely
time intensive10. In fact, if the literature of a field is growing faster
than the amount of time available for systematic reviews, adequate
manual review of this field then becomes impossible11.
The rapidly evolving field of machine learning has aided researchers by allowing the development of software tools that assist in

developing systematic reviews11–14. Machine learning offers
approaches to overcome the manual and time-consuming screening of large numbers of studies by prioritizing relevant studies via
active learning15. Active learning is a type of machine learning in
which a model can choose the data points (for example, records
obtained from a systematic search) it would like to learn from and
thereby drastically reduce the total number of records that require
manual screening16–18. In most so-called human-in-the-loop19
machine-learning applications, the interaction between the
machine-learning algorithm and the human is used to train a model
with a minimum number of labelling tasks. Unique to systematic
reviewing is that not only do all relevant records (that is, titles and
abstracts) need to seen by a researcher, but an extremely diverse
range of concepts also need to be learned, thereby requiring flexibility in the modelling approach as well as careful error evaluation11.
In the case of systematic reviewing, the algorithm(s) are interactively optimized for finding the most relevant records, instead of
finding the most accurate model. The term researcher-in-the-loop
was introduced20 as a special case of human-in-the-loop with three
unique components: (1) the primary output of the process is a selection of the records, not a trained machine learning model; (2) all
records in the relevant selection are seen by a human at the end of
the process21; (3) the use-case requires a reproducible workflow and
complete transparency is required22.
Existing tools that implement such an active learning cycle for
systematic reviewing are described in Table 1; see the Supplementary
Information for an overview of all of the software that we considered (note that this list was based on a review of software tools12).

1
Department of Methodology and Statistics, Faculty of Social and Behavioral Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands. 2Department of
Research and Data Management Services, Information Technology Services, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands. 3Utrecht University Library,
Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands. 4Department of Test and Quality Services, Information Technology Services, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the
Netherlands. 5School of Governance, Faculty of Law, Economics and Governance, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands. 6Department of Biostatistics,
Data management and Data Science, Julius Center, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands. ✉e-mail: a.g.j.vandeschoot@uu.nl

NatUre Machine Intelligence | VOL 3 | February 2021 | 125–133 | www.nature.com/natmachintell

125

Articles

NATuRe MAchine InTelligence

Table 1 | Existing tools that implement an RITL-based active learning cycle for systematic reviewing
Name

Machine learning algorithms

Active learning features

Privacy policy

Abstrackr

Classifier: SVM.
Model inputs: user-provided keywords
(relevant/irrelevant with degree of
confidence); citations.
Feature extraction: TF–IDF.
Label options: relevant; borderline;
irrelevant.

Query strategy: uncertainty-based;
certainty-based; random sampling.
Balance strategy: aggressive undersampling.
Active learning starts after: a reasonable
representation of the minority class has been
labelled (ref. 14).
Retraining: asynchronous.
Stopping: when the model predicts none of the
remaining abstracts to be relevant.

GDPR notification:
“We do not have a limit on how long we
retain your account information and/or
data.”.
“We do not share any information with
third parties.”.

ASReview27

Classifier: NB; SVM; DNN; LR;
LSTM-base; LSTM-pool; RF.
Model inputs: piece of text (for
example, title and abstract).
Feature extraction: Doc2Vec;
embedding IDF, TF–IDF, sBERT.
Label options: relevant; irrelevant.

Query strategy: uncertainty-based;
certainty-based; random sampling; mixed
sampling.
Balance strategy: simple (no balancing); dynamic
resampling (double and triple); undersampling.
Active learning starts after: one label.
Retraining: asynchronous.
Stopping: currently left to the reviewer.

The software does not have access to user
data, as the program runs locally.

Colandr59

Classifier: SVM with SGD learning.
Model inputs: user-provided key terms
and citation (abstract, title, keywords).
Feature extraction: Word2Vec
Label options: include; exclude.

Query strategy: certainty-based.
Balance strategy: reweighting.
Active learning starts after: 100 inclusions and
100 exclusions.
Retraining: every 30 abstracts.
Stopping: is left to the reviewer.

No terms and conditions available.
The Colandr team was contacted and they
ensured the user can remove data any
time. In the future, user data will be used
to improve Colandr but only if granted
permission from the project owner.

FASTREAD60

Classifier: SVM.
Model inputs: title and abstract.
Feature extraction: TF–IDF.
Label options: relevant; irrelevant.

Query strategy: uncertainty sampling; Certainty
The software does not have access to user
sampling. Users are allowed to switch between
data as the program runs locally.
active learning types after thirty inclusions.
Balance strategy: mix of weighting and aggressive
undersampling.
Active learning starts after: one relevant abstract
is retrieved (through querying random abstracts).
Retraining: every ten abstracts.
Stopping: the number of relevant abstracts is
estimated by semi-supervised learning.

Rayyan61

Classifier: SVM.
Model inputs: user-provided key terms
and citation (title and abstract).
Feature extraction: unigrams, bigrams,
MeSH terms.
Label options: include; exclude; maybe.

Query strategy: Rayyan predicts a relevancy of a
citation on a five-star scale. The user can order
citations by their predicted relevancy.
Balance strategy: unknown.
Active learning starts after: unknown.
Retraining: unknown; “as the user is labelling
citations”.
Stopping: when there are no more citations to
be labelled or when the model can no longer be
improved.

58

RobotAnalyst62 Classifier: SVM.
Model inputs: title; abstract; topic
model proportions.
Feature extraction: TF–IDF L2
normalized (title); BOW for abstract;
LDA for topic model proportions.
Label options: included; excluded;
undecided.

Rayyan terms of service:
3.1: “Rayyan, may use any User data and
information to evaluate and improve its
performance and expand its services.”.
3.4: “This Agreement is governed by the
laws of the State of Qatar. By accessing
this Rayyan website you consent to these
terms and conditions and to the exclusive
jurisdiction of the Qatar courts in all
disputes arising out of such access.”.
9.2.2: “Rayyan does not own User
Content. The User retains the copyright of
their Content. …”.

Query strategy: uncertainty-based;
Not available.
certainty-based.
Balance strategy: none.
Active learning starts after: a manually labelled
‘initial batch’ of abstracts, randomly sampled or
obtained through a focused search.
Retraining: when to retrain is left to the user.
Possible after every labelled citation
Stopping: is left to the reviewer, however at least a
sequence of excluded citations is necessary.

An overview of those tools that implemented active learning and describe what machine learning algorithms have been implemented, which active learning features are available and information about
privacy policy. As a starting point we used the systematic review12 that describes machine learning-aided software tools for systematic reviewing. In Supplementary Table 1 we provide an overview of all
tools found by Harrison and colleagues and indicate which open-source tools implemented machine learning and/or active learning. Note that we added FASTREAD, RobotAnalyst and ASReview to the
overview, which were not described by Harrison and co-workers. Machine learning, the kind of machine learning model used; active learning, how active learning is implemented; privacy policy, quotes
from privacy policy are given (if available) to indicate possible concerns; SVM, support vector machine; TF–IDF, term frequency–inverse document frequency; NB, naive Bayes; DNN, dense neural network;
LR, logistic regression; LSTM, long short-term memory; RF, random forests; Doc2Vec, document to vector; embedding IDF, embedding inverse document frequency; sBERT, sentence bidirectional encoder
representations from transformers; SGD, stochastic gradient descent; Word2Vec, words to vector; BOW, bag of words; LDA, latent dirichlet allocation; GDPR, general data protection regulation; MeSH,
medical subject headings.

126

NatUre Machine Intelligence | VOL 3 | February 2021 | 125–133 | www.nature.com/natmachintell

Articles

NATuRe MAchine InTelligence
However, existing tools have two main drawbacks. First, many are
closed source applications with black box algorithms, which is
problematic as transparency and data ownership are essential in
the era of open science22. Second, to our knowledge, existing tools
lack the necessary flexibility to deal with the large range of possible
concepts to be learned by a screening machine. For example, in
systematic reviews, the optimal type of classifier will depend on
variable parameters, such as the proportion of relevant publications in the initial search and the complexity of the inclusion criteria used by the researcher23. For this reason, any successful system
must allow for a wide range of classifier types. Benchmark testing is
crucial to understand the real-world performance of any machine
learning-aided system, but such benchmark options are currently
mostly lacking.
In this paper we present an open source machine learning-aided
pipeline with active learning for systematic reviews called
ASReview. The goal of ASReview is to help scholars and practitioners to get an overview of the most relevant records for their work
as efficiently as possible while being transparent in the process.
The open, free and ready-to-use software ASReview addresses all
concerns mentioned above: it is open source, uses active learning,
allows multiple machine learning models. It also has a benchmark
mode, which is especially useful for comparing and designing algorithms. Furthermore, it is intended to be easily extensible, allowing
third parties to add modules that enhance the pipeline. Although
we focus this paper on systematic reviews, ASReview can handle
any text source.
In what follows, we first present the pipeline for manual versus
machine learning-aided systematic reviews. We then show how
ASReview has been set up and how ASReview can be used in different workflows by presenting several real-world use cases. We subsequently demonstrate the results of simulations that benchmark
performance and present the results of a series of user-experience
tests. Finally, we discuss future directions.

Select prior
knowledge

Set model
parameters

(Re)train
Label
papers
model

Select record
to present to
the user

Provide label:
(ir)relevant

Screen record
text

Active learning cycle

Pipeline for manual and machine learning-aided systematic
reviews

The pipeline of a systematic review without active learning traditionally starts with researchers doing a comprehensive search in multiple
databases24, using free text words as well as controlled vocabulary
to retrieve potentially relevant references. The researcher then
typically verifies that the key papers they expect to find are indeed
included in the search results. The researcher downloads a file with
records containing the text to be screened. In the case of systematic reviewing it contains the titles and abstracts (and potentially
other metadata such as the authors’s names, journal name, DOI)
of potentially relevant references into a reference manager. Ideally,
two or more researchers then screen the records’s titles and abstracts
on the basis of the eligibility criteria established beforehand4. After
all records have been screened, the full texts of the potentially relevant records are read to determine which of them will be ultimately
included in the review. Most records are excluded in the title and
abstract phase. Typically, only a small fraction of the records belong
to the relevant class, making title and abstract screening an important bottleneck in systematic reviewing process25. For instance, a
recent study analysed 10,115 records and excluded 9,847 after title
and abstract screening, a drop of more than 95%26. ASReview therefore focuses on this labour-intensive step.
The research pipeline of ASReview is depicted in Fig. 1. The
researcher starts with a search exactly as described above and
subsequently uploads a file containing the records (that is, metadata containing the text of the titles and abstracts) into the software. Prior knowledge is then selected, which is used for training
of the first model and presenting the first record to the researcher.
As screening is a binary classification problem, the reviewer must
select at least one key record to include and exclude on the basis of

File with records

Choose a model
(classifier, feature
extraction, query
strategy, balance
strategy)

Stop labelling

Set of
relevant records

Fig. 1 | Machine learning-aided pipeline for ASReview. The symbols
indicate whether the action is taken by a human, a computer, or whether
both options are available.

background knowledge. More prior knowledge may result in
improved efficiency of the active learning process.
A machine learning classifier is trained to predict study relevance
(labels) from a representation of the record-containing text (feature
space) on the basis of prior knowledge. We have purposefully chosen not to include an author name or citation network representation in the feature space to prevent authority bias in the inclusions.
In the active learning cycle, the software presents one new record to
be screened and labelled by the user. The user’s binary label (1 for
relevant versus 0 for irrelevant) is subsequently used to train a new
model, after which a new record is presented to the user. This cycle
continues up to a certain user-specified stopping criterion has been
reached. The user now has a file with (1) records labelled as either
relevant or irrelevant and (2) unlabelled records ordered from most
to least probable to be relevant as predicted by the current model.

NatUre Machine Intelligence | VOL 3 | February 2021 | 125–133 | www.nature.com/natmachintell

127

Articles

NATuRe MAchine InTelligence

Table 2 | Implemented classifiers, feature extraction techniques, query strategies and balance strategies available in ASReview
Classifier

Feature extraction

Query strategy

Balance strategy

Naive Bayes (default)
Support vector machine
Neural network
Logistic regression
LSTM-base
LSTM-pool
Random forests

TF–IDF (default)
Embedding-IDF
Sentence BERT
Doc2Vec
Embedding LSTM

Certainty-based sampling (default)
Uncertainty-based sampling
Random sampling
Mixed sampling (for example, 5%
random/95% certainty-based)

Dynamic resampling (double and
triple) (double = default)
Undersampling
Simple (no balancing)

Note that not all combinations are possible. For example, the NB classifier cannot handle a feature matrix with negative values and thus cannot be combined with Doc2Vec; LSTM-base and LSTM-pool
classifiers exclusively work with embedding LSTM feature extraction and vice versa. Technical details are described in our documentation28.

This set-up helps to move through a large database much quicker
than in the manual process, while the decision process simultaneously remains transparent.

Software implementation for ASReview

The source code27 of ASReview is available open source under an
Apache 2.0 license, including documentation28. Compiled and
packaged versions of the software are available on the Python
Package Index29 or Docker Hub30. The free and ready-to-use software ASReview implements oracle, simulation and exploration
modes. The oracle mode is used to perform a systematic review with
interaction by the user, the simulation mode is used for simulation
of the ASReview performance on existing datasets, and the exploration mode can be used for teaching purposes and includes several
preloaded labelled datasets.
The oracle mode presents records to the researcher and the
researcher classifies these. Multiple file formats are supported: (1)
RIS files are used by digital libraries such as IEEE Xplore, Scopus
and ScienceDirect; the citation managers Mendeley, RefWorks,
Zotero and EndNote support the RIS format too. (2) Tabular datasets with the .csv, .xlsx and .xls file extensions. CSV files should be
comma separated and UTF-8 encoded; the software for CSV files
accepts a set of predetermined labels in line with the ones used in
RIS files. Each record in the dataset should hold the metadata on, for
example, a scientific publication. Mandatory metadata is text and
can, for example, be titles or abstracts from scientific papers. If available, both are used to train the model, but at least one is needed. An
advanced option is available that splits the title and abstracts in the
feature-extraction step and weights the two feature matrices independently (for TF–IDF only). Other metadata such as author, date,
DOI and keywords are optional but not used for training the models.
When using ASReview in the simulation or exploration mode, an
additional binary variable is required to indicate historical labelling
decisions. This column, which is automatically detected, can also
be used in the oracle mode as background knowledge for previous
selection of relevant papers before entering the active learning cycle.
If unavailable, the user has to select at least one relevant record that
can be identified by searching the pool of records. At least one irrelevant record should also be identified; the software allows to search
for specific records or presents random records that are most likely
to be irrelevant due to the extremely imbalanced data.
The software has a simple yet extensible default model: a naive
Bayes classifier, TF–IDF feature extraction, a dynamic resampling
balance strategy31 and certainty-based sampling17,32 for the query
strategy. These defaults were chosen on the basis of their consistently high performance in benchmark experiments across several
datasets31. Moreover, the low computation time of these default settings makes them attractive in applications, given that the software
should be able to run locally. Users can change the settings, shown
in Table 2, and technical details are described in our documentation28. Users can also add their own classifiers, feature extraction
techniques, query strategies and balance strategies.
128

ASReview has a number of implemented features (see Table 2).
First, there are several classifiers available: (1) naive Bayes; (2) support vector machines; (3) logistic regression; (4) neural networks;
(5) random forests; (6) LSTM-base, which consists of an embedding
layer, an LSTM layer with one output, a dense layer and a single sigmoid output node; and (7) LSTM-pool, which consists of an embedding layer, an LSTM layer with many outputs, a max pooling layer
and a single sigmoid output node. The feature extraction techniques
available are Doc2Vec33, embedding LSTM, embedding with IDF or
TF–IDF34 (the default is unigram, with the option to run n-grams
while other parameters are set to the defaults of Scikit-learn35) and
sBERT36. The available query strategies for the active learning part
are (1) random selection, ignoring model-assigned probabilities;
(2) uncertainty-based sampling, which chooses the most uncertain
record according to the model (that is, closest to 0.5 probability);
(3) certainty-based sampling (max in ASReview), which chooses
the record most likely to be included according to the model; and
(4) mixed sampling, which uses a combination of random and
certainty-based sampling.
There are several balance strategies that rebalance and reorder
the training data. This is necessary, because the data is typically
extremely imbalanced and therefore we have implemented the following balance strategies: (1) full sampling, which uses all of the
labelled records; (2) undersampling the irrelevant records so that
the included and excluded records are in some particular ratio
(closer to one); and (3) dynamic resampling, a novel method similar
to undersampling in that it decreases the imbalance of the training
data31. However, in dynamic resampling, the number of irrelevant
records is decreased, whereas the number of relevant records is
increased by duplication such that the total number of records in
the training data remains the same. The ratio between relevant and
irrelevant records is not fixed over interactions, but dynamically
updated depending on the number of labelled records, the total
number of records and the ratio between relevant and irrelevant
records. Details on all of the described algorithms can be found in
the code and documentation referred to above.
By default, ASReview converts the records’s texts into a
document-term matrix, terms are converted to lowercase and
no stop words are removed by default (but this can be changed).
As the document-term matrix is identical in each iteration of the
active learning cycle, it is generated in advance of model training and stored in the (active learning) state file. Each row of the
document-term matrix can easily be requested from the state-file.
Records are internally identified by their row number in the input
dataset. In oracle mode, the record that is selected to be classified is
retrieved from the state file and the record text and other metadata
(such as title and abstract) are retrieved from the original dataset
(from the file or the computer’s memory). ASReview can run on
your local computer, or on a (self-hosted) local or remote server.
Data (all records and their labels) remain on the users’s computer.
Data ownership and confidentiality are crucial and no data are
processed or used in any way by third parties. This is unique by

NatUre Machine Intelligence | VOL 3 | February 2021 | 125–133 | www.nature.com/natmachintell

Articles

NATuRe MAchine InTelligence
comparison with some of the existing systems, as shown in the last
column of Table 1.

Real-world use cases and high-level function descriptions

Below we highlight a number of real-world use cases and high-level
function descriptions for using the pipeline of ASReview.
ASReview can be integrated in classic systematic reviews or
meta-analyses. Such reviews or meta-analyses entail several explicit
and reproducible steps, as outlined in the PRISMA guidelines4.
Scholars identify all likely relevant publications in a standardized
way, screen retrieved publications to select eligible studies on the
basis of defined eligibility criteria, extract data from eligible studies and synthesize the results. ASReview fits into this process, particularly in the abstract screening phase. ASReview does not replace
the initial step of collecting all potentially relevant studies. As such,
results from ASReview depend on the quality of the initial search
process, including selection of databases24 and construction of comprehensive searches using keywords and controlled vocabulary.
However, ASReview can be used to broaden the scope of the search
(by keyword expansion or omitting limitation in the search query),
resulting in a higher number of initial papers to limit the risk of
missing relevant papers during the search part (that is, more focus
on recall instead of precision).
Furthermore, many reviewers nowadays move towards metareviews when analysing very large literature streams, that is, systematic reviews of systematic reviews37. This can be problematic as the
various reviews included could use different eligibility criteria and
are therefore not always directly comparable. Due to the efficiency
of ASReview, scholars using the tool could conduct the study by analysing the papers directly instead of using the systematic reviews.
Furthermore, ASReview supports the rapid update of a systematic
review. The included papers from the initial review are used to train
the machine learning model before screening of the updated set of
papers starts. This allows the researcher to quickly screen the updated
set of papers on the basis of decisions made in the initial run.
As an example case, let us look at the current literature on
COVID-19 and the coronavirus. An enormous number of papers
are being published on COVID-19. It is very time consuming to
manually find relevant papers (for example, to develop treatment
guidelines). This is especially problematic as urgent overviews are
required. Medical guidelines rely on comprehensive systematic
reviews, but the medical literature is growing at breakneck pace and
the quality of the research is not universally adequate for summarization into policy38. Such reviews must entail adequate protocols
with explicit and reproducible steps, including identifying all potentially relevant papers, extracting data from eligible studies, assessing
potential for bias and synthesizing the results into medical guidelines. Researchers need to screen (tens of) thousands of COVID19-related studies by hand to find relevant papers to include in their
overview. Using ASReview, this can be done far more efficiently by
selecting key papers that match their (COVID-19) research question in the first step; this should start the active learning cycle and
lead to the most relevant COVID-19 papers for their research question being presented next. A plug-in was therefore developed for
ASReview39, which contained three databases that are updated automatically whenever a new version is released by the owners of the
data: (1) the Cord19 database, developed by the Allen Institute for
AI, with over all publications on COVID-19 and other coronavirus research (for example SARS, MERS and so on) from PubMed
Central, the WHO COVID-19 database of publications, the preprint servers bioRxiv and medRxiv and papers contributed by specific publishers40. The CORD-19 dataset is updated daily by the
Allen Institute for AI and updated also daily in the plugin. (2) In
addition to the full dataset, we automatically construct a daily subset of the database with studies published after December 1st, 2019
to search for relevant papers published during the COVID-19 crisis.

(3) A separate dataset of COVID-19 related preprints, containing
metadata of preprints from over 15 preprints servers across disciplines, published since January 1st, 202041. The preprint dataset is
updated weekly by the maintainers and then automatically updated
in ASReview as well. As this dataset is not readily available to
researchers through regular search engines (for example, PubMed),
its inclusion in ASReview provided added value to researchers interested in COVID-19 research, especially if they want a quick way to
screen preprints specifically.

Simulation study

To evaluate the performance of ASReview on a labelled dataset,
users can employ the simulation mode. As an example, we ran
simulations based on four labelled datasets with version 0.7.2 of
ASReview. All scripts to reproduce the results in this paper can
be found on Zenodo (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4024122)42,
whereas the results are available at OSF (https://doi.org/10.17605/
OSF.IO/2JKD6)43.
Datasets. First, we analysed the performance for a study systematically describing studies that performed viral metagenomic
next-generation sequencing in common livestock such as cattle,
small ruminants, poultry and pigs44. Studies were retrieved from
Embase (n = 1,806), Medline (n = 1,384), Cochrane Central (n = 1),
Web of Science (n = 977) and Google Scholar (n = 200, the top
relevant references). After deduplication this led to 2,481 studies
obtained in the initial search, of which 120 were inclusions (4.84%).
A second simulation study was performed on the results for a systematic review of studies on fault prediction in software engineering45. Studies were obtained from ACM Digital Library, IEEExplore
and the ISI Web of Science. Furthermore, a snowballing strategy
and a manual search were conducted, accumulating to 8,911 publications of which 104 were included in the systematic review (1.2%).
A third simulation study was performed on a review of longitudinal studies that applied unsupervised machine learning
techniques to longitudinal data of self-reported symptoms of the
post-traumatic stress assessed after trauma exposure46,47; 5,782
studies were obtained by searching Pubmed, Embase, PsychInfo
and Scopus and through a snowballing strategy in which both the
references and the citation of the included papers were screened.
Thirty-eight studies were included in the review (0.66%).
A fourth simulation study was performed on the results for a
systematic review on the efficacy of angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors, from a study collecting various systematic review datasets from the medical sciences15. The collection is a subset of 2,544
publications from the TREC 2004 Genomics Track document corpus48. This is a static subset from all MEDLINE records from 1994
through 2003, which allows for replicability of results. Forty-one
publications were included in the review (1.6%).
Performance metrics. We evaluated the four datasets using three
performance metrics. We first assess the work saved over sampling (WSS), which is the percentage reduction in the number of
records needed to screen achieved by using active learning instead
of screening records at random; WSS is measured at a given level
of recall of relevant records, for example 95%, indicating the work
reduction in screening effort at the cost of failing to detect 5% of
the relevant records. For some researchers it is essential that all relevant literature on the topic is retrieved; this entails that the recall
should be 100% (that is, WSS@100%). We also propose the amount
of relevant references found after having screened the first 10% of
the records (RRF10%). This is a useful metric for getting a quick
overview of the relevant literature.
Results. For every dataset, 15 runs were performed with one random inclusion and one random exclusion (see Fig. 2). The classical

NatUre Machine Intelligence | VOL 3 | February 2021 | 125–133 | www.nature.com/natmachintell

129

Articles

NATuRe MAchine InTelligence

a 100

b 100

80
60

WSS@100% ≈ 73.39%

WSS@95% ≈ 67.4%

Percent inclusions found

Percent inclusions found

WSS@100% ≈ 41.39%

RRF@10% ≈ 70.2%
Random

40
20
0

0

40

20

60

80

80

RRF@10% ≈ 99.03%

60
Random

40
20
0

100

WSS@95% ≈ 92.11%

0

20

Percent reviewed

40

c 100

100

WSS@100% ≈ 38.28%

WSS@95% ≈ 91.64%

80

Percent inclusions found

Percent inclusions found

80

d 100
WSS@100% ≈ 92.6%

RRF@10% ≈ 100.0%

60
Random

40
20
0

60

Percent reviewed

0

20

40

60

80

100

Percent reviewed

WSS@95% ≈ 78.67%

80
60

RRF@10% ≈ 83.33%

Random

40
20
0

0

20

40

60

80

100

Percent reviewed

Fig. 2 | Simulation results. a–d, Results of the simulation study for the results for a study systematically review studies that performed viral metagenomic
next-generation sequencing in common livestock (a), results for a systematic review of studies on fault prediction in software engineering (b), results
for longitudinal studies that applied unsupervised machine learning techniques on longitudinal data of self-reported symptoms of posttraumatic
stress assessed after trauma exposure (c), and results for a systematic review on the efficacy of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (d). Fiteen
runs (shown with separate lines) were performed for every dataset, with only one random inclusion and one random exclusion. The classical review
performances with randomly found inclusions are shown by the dashed lines.

review performance with randomly found inclusions is shown by
the dashed line. The average work saved over sampling at 95% recall
for ASReview is 83% and ranges from 67% to 92%. Hence, 95% of
the eligible studies will be found after screening between only 8% to
33% of the studies. Furthermore, the number of relevant abstracts
found after reading 10% of the abstracts ranges from 70% to 100%.
In short, our software would have saved many hours of work.

Usability testing (user experience testing)

We conducted a series of user experience tests to learn from end
users how they experience the software and implement it in their
workflow. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the
Faculty of Social and Behavioral Sciences of Utrecht University
(ID 20-104).
Unstructured interviews. The first user experience (UX) test—
carried out in December 2019—was conducted with an academic
research team in a substantive research field (public administration
and organizational science) that has conducted various systematic
reviews and meta-analyses. It was composed of three university professors (ranging from assistant to full) and three PhD candidates. In
one 3.5 h session, the participants used the software and provided
feedback via unstructured interviews and group discussions. The
goal was to provide feedback on installing the software and testing the performance on their own data. After these sessions we prioritized the feedback in a meeting with the ASReview team, which
resulted in the release of v.0.4 and v.0.6. An overview of all releases
can be found on GitHub27.
A second UX test was conducted with four experienced researchers developing medical guidelines based on classical systematic
130

reviews, and two experienced reviewers working at a pharmaceutical non-profit organization who work on updating reviews with
new data. In four sessions, held in February to March 2020, these
users tested the software following our testing protocol. After each
session we implemented the feedback provided by the experts and
asked them to review the software again. The main feedback was
about how to upload datasets and select prior papers. Their feedback resulted in the release of v.0.7 and v.0.9.
Systematic UX test. In May 2020 we conducted a systematic UX
test. Two groups of users were distinguished: an unexperienced
group and an experienced user who already used ASReview. Due
to the COVID-19 lockdown the usability tests were conducted via
video calling where one person gave instructions to the participant
and one person observed, called human-moderated remote testing49. During the tests, one person (SH) asked the questions and
helped the participant with the tasks, the other person observed and
made notes, a user experience professional at the IT department of
Utrecht University (MH).
To analyse the notes, thematic analysis was used, which is a
method to analyse data by dividing the information in subjects that
all have a different meaning50 using the Nvivo 12 software51. When
something went wrong the text was coded as showstopper, when
something did not go smoothly the text was coded as doubtful, and
when something went well the subject was coded as superb. The features the participants requested for future versions of the ASReview
tool were discussed with the lead engineer of the ASReview team
and were submitted to GitHub as issues or feature requests.
The answers to the quantitative questions can be found at
the Open Science Framework52. The participants (N = 11) rated

NatUre Machine Intelligence | VOL 3 | February 2021 | 125–133 | www.nature.com/natmachintell

Articles

NATuRe MAchine InTelligence
the tool with a grade of 7.9 (s.d. = 0.9) on a scale from one to ten
(Table 2). The unexperienced users on average rated the tool
with an 8.0 (s.d. = 1.1, N = 6). The experienced user on average
rated the tool with a 7.8 (s.d. = 0.9, N = 5). The participants
described the usability test with words such as helpful, accessible,
fun, clear and obvious.
The UX tests resulted in the new release v0.10, v0.10.1 and the
major release v0.11, which is a major revision of the graphical user
interface. The documentation has been upgraded to make installing
and launching ASReview more straightforward. We made setting up
the project, selecting a dataset and finding past knowledge is more
intuitive and flexible. We also added a project dashboard with information on your progress and advanced settings.
Continuous input via the open source community. Finally, the
ASReview development team receives continuous feedback from
the open science community about, among other things, the user
experience. In every new release we implement features listed by
our users. Recurring UX tests are performed to keep up with the
needs of users and improve the value of the tool.

Conclusion

We designed a system to accelerate the step of screening titles
and abstracts to help researchers conduct a systematic review or
meta-analysis as efficiently and transparently as possible. Our system uses active learning to train a machine learning model that
predicts relevance from texts using a limited number of labelled
examples. The classifier, feature extraction technique, balance
strategy and active learning query strategy are flexible. We provide an open source software implementation, ASReview with
state-of-the-art systems across a wide range of real-world systematic
reviewing applications. Based on our experiments, ASReview provides defaults on its parameters, which exhibited good performance
on average across the applications we examined. However, we
stress that in practical applications, these defaults should be carefully examined; for this purpose, the software provides a simulation mode to users. We encourage users and developers to perform
further evaluation of the proposed approach in their application,
and to take advantage of the open source nature of the project by
contributing further developments.
Drawbacks of machine learning-based screening systems,
including our own, remain. First, although the active learning step
greatly reduces the number of manuscripts that must be screened, it
also prevents a straightforward evaluation of the system’s error rates
without further onerous labelling. Providing users with an accurate
estimate of the system’s error rate in the application at hand is therefore a pressing open problem. Second, although, as argued above,
the use of such systems is not limited in principle to reviewing, no
empirical benchmarks of actual performance in these other situations yet exist to our knowledge. Third, machine learning-based
screening systems automate the screening step only; although the
screening step is time-consuming and a good target for automation, it is just one part of a much larger process, including the initial
search, data extraction, coding for risk of bias, summarizing results
and so on. Although some other works, similar to our own, have
looked at (semi-)automating some of these steps in isolation53,54, to
our knowledge the field is still far removed from an integrated system that would truly automate the review process while guaranteeing the quality of the produced evidence synthesis. Integrating the
various tools that are currently under development to aid the systematic reviewing pipeline is therefore a worthwhile topic for future
development.
Possible future research could also focus on the performance
of identifying full text articles with different document length and
domain-specific terminologies or even other types of text, such
as newspaper articles and court cases. When the selection of past

knowledge is not possible based on expert knowledge, alternative
methods could be explored. For example, unsupervised learning or
pseudolabelling algorithms could be used to improve training55,56. In
addition, as the NLP community pushes forward the state of the art
in feature extraction methods, these are easily added to our system
as well. In all cases, performance benefits should be carefully evaluated using benchmarks for the task at hand. To this end, common
benchmark challenges should be constructed that allow for an even
comparison of the various tools now available. To facilitate such a
benchmark, we have constructed a repository of publicly available
systematic reviewing datasets57.
The future of systematic reviewing will be an interaction with
machine learning algorithms to deal with the enormous increase
of available text. We invite the community to contribute to open
source projects such as our own, as well as to common benchmark
challenges, so that we can provide measurable and reproducible
improvement over current practice.

Data availability

The results described in this paper are available at the Open Science
Framework
(https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/2JKD6)43.
The
answers to the quantitative questions of the UX test can be found at
the Open Science Framework (OSF.IO/7PQNM)52.

Code availability

All code to reproduce the results described in this paper can be
found on Zenodo (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4024122)42. All
code for the software ASReview is available under an Apache 2.0
license (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3345592)27, is maintained
on GitHub63 and includes documentation (https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.4287120)28.
Received: 4 June 2020; Accepted: 17 December 2020;
Published online: 1 February 2021

References

1. Bornmann, L. & Mutz, R. Growth rates of modern science: a bibliometric
analysis based on the number of publications and cited references. J. Assoc.
Inf. Sci. Technol. 66, 2215–2222 (2015).
2. Gough, D., Oliver, S. & Thomas, J. An Introduction to Systematic Reviews
(Sage, 2017).
3. Cooper, H. Research Synthesis and Meta-analysis: A Step-by-Step Approach
(SAGE Publications, 2015).
4. Liberati, A. et al. The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and
meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health care interventions: explanation
and elaboration. J. Clin. Epidemiol. 62, e1–e34 (2009).
5. Boaz, A. et al. Systematic Reviews: What have They Got to Offer Evidence
Based Policy and Practice? (ESRC UK Centre for Evidence Based Policy and
Practice London, 2002).
6. Oliver, S., Dickson, K. & Bangpan, M. Systematic Reviews: Making Them
Policy Relevant. A Briefing for Policy Makers and Systematic Reviewers (UCL
Institute of Education, 2015).
7. Petticrew, M. Systematic reviews from astronomy to zoology: myths and
misconceptions. Brit. Med. J. 322, 98–101 (2001).
8. Lefebvre, C., Manheimer, E. & Glanville, J. in Cochrane Handbook for
Systematic Reviews of Interventions (eds. Higgins, J. P. & Green, S.) 95–150
(John Wiley & Sons, 2008); https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470712184.ch6.
9. Sampson, M., Tetzlaff, J. & Urquhart, C. Precision of healthcare systematic
review searches in a cross-sectional sample. Res. Synth. Methods 2,
119–125 (2011).
10. Wang, Z., Nayfeh, T., Tetzlaff, J., O’Blenis, P. & Murad, M. H. Error rates of
human reviewers during abstract screening in systematic reviews. PLoS ONE
15, e0227742 (2020).
11. Marshall, I. J. & Wallace, B. C. Toward systematic review automation: a
practical guide to using machine learning tools in research synthesis. Syst.
Rev. 8, 163 (2019).
12. Harrison, H., Griffin, S. J., Kuhn, I. & Usher-Smith, J. A. Software tools to
support title and abstract screening for systematic reviews in healthcare: an
evaluation. BMC Med. Res. Methodol. 20, 7 (2020).
13. O’Mara-Eves, A., Thomas, J., McNaught, J., Miwa, M. & Ananiadou, S. Using
text mining for study identification in systematic reviews: a systematic review
of current approaches. Syst. Rev. 4, 5 (2015).

NatUre Machine Intelligence | VOL 3 | February 2021 | 125–133 | www.nature.com/natmachintell

131

Articles

NATuRe MAchine InTelligence

14. Wallace, B. C., Trikalinos, T. A., Lau, J., Brodley, C. & Schmid, C. H.
Semi-automated screening of biomedical citations for systematic reviews.
BMC Bioinf. 11, 55 (2010).
15. Cohen, A. M., Hersh, W. R., Peterson, K. & Yen, P.-Y. Reducing workload in
systematic review preparation using automated citation classification. J. Am.
Med. Inform. Assoc. 13, 206–219 (2006).
16. Kremer, J., Steenstrup Pedersen, K. & Igel, C. Active learning with support
vector machines. WIREs Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 4, 313–326 (2014).
17. Miwa, M., Thomas, J., O’Mara-Eves, A. & Ananiadou, S. Reducing systematic
review workload through certainty-based screening. J. Biomed. Inform. 51,
242–253 (2014).
18. Settles, B. Active Learning Literature Survey (Minds@UW, 2009); https://
minds.wisconsin.edu/handle/1793/60660
19. Holzinger, A. Interactive machine learning for health informatics: when do
we need the human-in-the-loop? Brain Inform. 3, 119–131 (2016).
20. Van de Schoot, R. & De Bruin, J. Researcher-in-the-loop for Systematic
Reviewing of Text Databases (Zenodo, 2020); https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.4013207
21. Kim, D., Seo, D., Cho, S. & Kang, P. Multi-co-training for document
classification using various document representations: TF–IDF, LDA, and
Doc2Vec. Inf. Sci. 477, 15–29 (2019).
22. Nosek, B. A. et al. Promoting an open research culture. Science 348,
1422–1425 (2015).
23. Kilicoglu, H., Demner-Fushman, D., Rindflesch, T. C., Wilczynski, N. L. &
Haynes, R. B. Towards automatic recognition of scientifically rigorous clinical
research evidence. J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 16, 25–31 (2009).
24. Gusenbauer, M. & Haddaway, N. R. Which academic search systems are
suitable for systematic reviews or meta‐analyses? Evaluating retrieval qualities
of Google Scholar, PubMed, and 26 other resources. Res. Synth. Methods 11,
181–217 (2020).
25. Borah, R., Brown, A. W., Capers, P. L. & Kaiser, K. A. Analysis of
the time and workers needed to conduct systematic reviews of medical
interventions using data from the PROSPERO registry. BMJ Open 7,
e012545 (2017).
26. de Vries, H., Bekkers, V. & Tummers, L. Innovation in the Public
Sector: a systematic review and future research agenda. Public Adm. 94,
146–166 (2016).
27. Van de Schoot, R. et al. ASReview: Active Learning for Systematic Reviews
(Zenodo, 2020); https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3345592
28. De Bruin, J. et al. ASReview Software Documentation 0.14 (Zenodo, 2020);
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4287120
29. ASReview PyPI Package (ASReview Core Development Team, 2020);
https://pypi.org/project/asreview/
30. Docker container for ASReview (ASReview Core Development Team, 2020);
https://hub.docker.com/r/asreview/asreview
31. Ferdinands, G. et al. Active Learning for Screening Prioritization in Systematic
Reviews—A Simulation Study (OSF Preprints, 2020); https://doi.org/10.31219/
osf.io/w6qbg
32. Fu, J. H. & Lee, S. L. Certainty-enhanced active learning for improving
imbalanced data classification. In 2011 IEEE 11th International Conference on
Data Mining Workshops 405–412 (IEEE, 2011).
33. Le, Q. V. & Mikolov, T. Distributed representations of sentences and
documents. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1405.4053 (2014).
34. Ramos, J. Using TF–IDF to determine word relevance in document queries.
In Proc. 1st Instructional Conference on Machine Learning Vol. 242,
133–142 (ICML, 2003).
35. Pedregosa, F. et al. Scikit-learn: machine learning in Python. J. Mach. Learn.
Res. 12, 2825–2830 (2011).
36. Reimers, N. & Gurevych, I. Sentence-BERT: sentence embeddings using
siamese BERT-networks Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.10084 (2019).
37. Smith, V., Devane, D., Begley, C. M. & Clarke, M. Methodology in
conducting a systematic review of systematic reviews of healthcare
interventions. BMC Med. Res. Methodol. 11, 15 (2011).
38. Wynants, L. et al. Prediction models for diagnosis and prognosis of
COVID-19: systematic review and critical appraisal. Brit. Med. J. 369,
1328 (2020).
39. Van de Schoot, R. et al. Extension for COVID-19 Related Datasets in
ASReview (Zenodo, 2020). https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3891420.
40. Lu Wang, L. et al. CORD-19: The COVID-19 open research dataset. Preprint
at https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.10706 (2020).
41. Fraser, N. & Kramer, B. Covid19_preprints (FigShare, 2020); https://doi.
org/10.6084/m9.figshare.12033672.v18
42. Ferdinands, G., Schram, R., Van de Schoot, R. & De Bruin, J. Scripts for
‘ASReview: Open Source Software for Efficient and Transparent Active Learning
for Systematic Reviews’ (Zenodo, 2020); https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.4024122
43. Ferdinands, G., Schram, R., van de Schoot, R. & de Bruin, J. Results for
‘ASReview: Open Source Software for Efficient and Transparent Active Learning
for Systematic Reviews’ (OSF, 2020); https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/2JKD6
132

44. Kwok, K. T. T., Nieuwenhuijse, D. F., Phan, M. V. T. & Koopmans, M. P. G.
Virus metagenomics in farm animals: a systematic review. Viruses 12,
107 (2020).
45. Hall, T., Beecham, S., Bowes, D., Gray, D. & Counsell, S. A systematic
literature review on fault prediction performance in software engineering.
IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 38, 1276–1304 (2012).
46. van de Schoot, R., Sijbrandij, M., Winter, S. D., Depaoli, S. & Vermunt, J. K.
The GRoLTS-Checklist: guidelines for reporting on latent trajectory studies.
Struct. Equ. Model. Multidiscip. J. 24, 451–467 (2017).
47. van de Schoot, R. et al. Bayesian PTSD-trajectory analysis with informed
priors based on a systematic literature search and expert elicitation. Multivar.
Behav. Res. 53, 267–291 (2018).
48. Cohen, A. M., Bhupatiraju, R. T. & Hersh, W. R. Feature generation, feature
selection, classifiers, and conceptual drift for biomedical document triage. In
Proc. 13th Text Retrieval Conference (TREC, 2004).
49. Vasalou, A., Ng, B. D., Wiemer-Hastings, P. & Oshlyansky, L.
Human-moderated remote user testing: orotocols and applications. In
8th ERCIM Workshop, User Interfaces for All Vol. 19 (ERCIM, 2004).
50. Joffe, H. in Qualitative Research Methods in Mental Health and Psychotherapy:
A Guide for Students and Practitioners (eds Harper, D. & Thompson, A. R.)
Ch. 15 (Wiley, 2012).
51. NVivo v.12 (QSR International Pty, 2019).
52. Hindriks, S., Huijts, M. & van de Schoot, R. Data for UX-test ASReview
- June 2020. OSF https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/7PQNM (2020).
53. Marshall, I. J., Kuiper, J. & Wallace, B. C. RobotReviewer: evaluation of a
system for automatically assessing bias in clinical trials. J. Am. Med. Inform.
Assoc. 23, 193–201 (2016).
54. Nallapati, R., Zhou, B., dos Santos, C. N., Gulcehre, Ç. & Xiang, B. Abstractive
text summarization using sequence-to-sequence RNNs and beyond. In Proc.
20th SIGNLL Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning
280–290 (Association for Computational Linguistics, 2016).
55. Xie, Q., Dai, Z., Hovy, E., Luong, M.-T. & Le, Q. V. Unsupervised data
augmentation for consistency training. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/
abs/1904.12848 (2019).
56. Ratner, A. et al. Snorkel: rapid training data creation with weak supervision.
VLDB J. 29, 709–730 (2020).
57. Systematic Review Datasets (ASReview Core Development Team, 2020);
https://github.com/asreview/systematic-review-datasets
58. Wallace, B. C., Small, K., Brodley, C. E., Lau, J. & Trikalinos, T. A. Deploying
an interactive machine learning system in an evidence-based practice center:
Abstrackr. In Proc. 2nd ACM SIGHIT International Health Informatics
Symposium 819–824 (Association for Computing Machinery, 2012).
59. Cheng, S. H. et al. Using machine learning to advance synthesis and use of
conservation and environmental evidence. Conserv. Biol. 32, 762–764 (2018).
60. Yu, Z., Kraft, N. & Menzies, T. Finding better active learners for faster
literature reviews. Empir. Softw. Eng. 23, 3161–3186 (2018).
61. Ouzzani, M., Hammady, H., Fedorowicz, Z. & Elmagarmid, A. Rayyan—a
web and mobile app for systematic reviews. Syst. Rev. 5, 210 (2016).
62. Przybyła, P. et al. Prioritising references for systematic reviews with
RobotAnalyst: a user study. Res. Synth. Methods 9, 470–488 (2018).
63. ASReview: Active learning for Systematic Reviews (ASReview Core
Development Team, 2020); https://github.com/asreview/asreview

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the Utrecht University Library, focus area Applied Data Science,
and departments of Information and Technology Services, Test and Quality Services,
and Methodology and Statistics, for their support. We also want to thank all researchers
who shared data, participated in our user experience tests or who gave us feedback on
ASReview in other ways. Furthermore, we would like to thank the editors and reviewers
for providing constructive feedback. This project was funded by the Innovation Fund for
IT in Research Projects, Utrecht University, the Netherlands.

Author contributions

R.v.d.S. and D.O. originally designed the project, with later input from L.T. J.d.Br. is the
lead engineer, software architect and supervises the code base on GitHub. R.S. coded
the algorithms and simulation studies. P.Z. coded the very first version of the software.
J.d.Bo., F.W. and B.K. developed the systematic review pipeline. M.Huijts is leading
the UX tests and was supported by S.H. M.Hoogerwerf developed the architecture of
the produced (meta)data. G.F. conducted the simulation study together with R.S. A.H.
performed the literature search comparing the different tools together with G.F. J.W.
designed all the artwork and helped with formatting the manuscript. Y.M. and Q.F. are
responsible for the preprocessing of the metadata under the supervision of J.d.Br. R.v.d.S,
D.O. and L.T. wrote the paper with input from all authors. Each co-author has written
parts of the manuscript.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

NatUre Machine Intelligence | VOL 3 | February 2021 | 125–133 | www.nature.com/natmachintell

Articles

NATuRe MAchine InTelligence
Additional information

Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s42256-020-00287-7.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to R.v.d.S.
Peer review information Nature Machine Intelligence thanks Jian Wu and
the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of
this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other
third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license,
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2021

NatUre Machine Intelligence | VOL 3 | February 2021 | 125–133 | www.nature.com/natmachintell

133

