Journal of Cleaner Production 435 (2024) 140301

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Cleaner Production
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jclepro

A systematic literature review of modern slavery in supply chain
management: State of the art, framework development and
research opportunities
Vanja Strand a, *, Maryam Lotfi a, Anthony Flynn a, Helen Walker a
a

Logistics and Operations Management Section, Cardiff Business School, Cardiff University, Aberconway Building, Colum Drive, Cardiff CF10 3EU, Cardiff, UK

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Handling Editor: Dr. Govindan Kannan

Given increased awareness about modern slavery in supply chain management (SCM), this paper undertakes a
systematic literature review (SLR) covering 106 published articles. We first carry out a descriptive analysis, with
results showing that modern slavery research is on an upward trajectory but suffers from a lack of primary data
and theory application. We then extract themes from the published articles and use them to provide theory
elaboration of Gold et al. (2015) model of modern slavery in SCM. Specifically, we introduce business culture and
high impact risk factors like pandemics as new institutional factors; highlight external stakeholders like
recruitment agents and audit firms as integral to understanding the business context of modern slavery; and add
prevention and remediation to detection and response as discrete categories in managing modern slavery risks.
We also discuss the gaps in modern slavery research in supply chains. Finally, we propose that reshoring, in­
dustry 4.0 and supply chain collaboration represent SCM specialisms that can inform modern slavery research
going forward.

Keywords:
Social sustainability
Modern slavery
Forced labour
Supply chain management
Systematic review

1. Introduction
Modern slavery has received increasing attention in recent years,
across a range of stakeholders such as businesses, non-government or­
ganisations (NGOs), policy makers, and academics (Gold et al., 2015;
New, 2015). In practice, high profile modern slavery cases have
heightened public awareness. Across social media, recent protests
including those around the Qatar FIFA World Cup have highlighted
social injustices, and modern slavery exemplifies global social injustice,
as workers in supply chains from the global south are more likely to be
subjected to it. There has been a raft of legislation in the last decade,
with California being the first US State to introduce the ‘Transparency in
Supply Chains’ Act (California, 2010), followed by the UK Modern
Slavery Act (2015), Australia Modern Slavery Act (2018) and the EU has
proposed sweeping new regulations to ban products made with forced
labour, which are likely to be in force from 2025. The effectiveness of
such legislation is however questioned, with recent studies indicating
that the modern slavery equivalent of “greenwashing” is taking place, e.
g., through the commodification of anti-slavery initiatives in market­
isation (Gutierrez-Huerter et al., 2021, McGrath et al., 2022; Richards,
2022, Pesterfieldc and Rogerson, 2023).

There has also been a spike in academic interest in modern slavery,
with journal papers exploring modern slavery increasing year on year.
Much of it has been driven by the recent availability of corporate
statements on modern slavery in US, UK, and Australian contexts. Re­
searchers have mined this source of secondary data to investigate what
firms are doing to tackle modern slavery and why they are doing it
(Birkey et al., 2018; Stevenson and Cole, 2018; Christ and Burritt, 2021;
Flynn and Walker, 2021; Schaper and Pollach, 2021; Jones et al., 2022;
Pinnington et al., 2023). Another significant development has been the
Covid-19 pandemic. It exposed modern slavery risks in the supply chains
of personal protective equipment (PPE), apparel and other manufac­
tured products (Trautrims et al., 2020b; Cole and Shirgholami, 2021;
Hughes et al., 2023) and ensured that the issue stayed in the public
spotlight. Attempts at reviewing existing research on modern slavery
have already been made, both from accounting (Mehmood et al., 2022)
and supply chain perspectives (Han et al., 2022; Ishaya et al., 2023) and
these have yielded useful insights on progress to date. This SLR aims to
provide a more comprehensive review of modern slavery in supply
chains literature by searching a broader range of journals and updating
and extending Gold et al.’s (2015) early framework with recent
literature.

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: strandv@cardiff.ac.uk (V. Strand).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2023.140301
Received 9 May 2023; Received in revised form 23 November 2023; Accepted 18 December 2023
Available online 23 December 2023
0959-6526/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

V. Strand et al.

Journal of Cleaner Production 435 (2024) 140301

In our exploration of the literature on modern slavery in supply
chains, we address the following research questions:

review papers (see Appendix B).
3. Methods

1. What research currently exists on modern slavery in supply chains?
2. How has modern slavery in supply chains been approached by re­
searchers, and how could Gold et al.’s (2015) model be updated?

3.1. Definition
Modern slavery has been variously defined. Traditional slavery was
based on the transatlantic slave trade where slaves were legally owned
by slaveholders. However, slavery was later abolished and determined
illegal by most countries, hence the new forms of modern slavery do not
proclaim that slaves are owned (Craig, 2017). The term modern slavery
has increasingly circulated through media, civil society, policy, and
legislation, but there is no commonly agreed upon definition. Modern
slavery encompasses different elements of slavery in different defini­
tions. Extreme labour exploitation is one of these elements, but it can
also encompass other forms of slavery, such as human trafficking, sexual
exploitation, child labour, organ harvesting, domestic servitude,
debt-bondage, criminal exploitation and forced marriage (Cooper et al.,
2017; Voss et al., 2019).
The SCM literature has largely focused on the definition provided by
Gold et al. (2015), who defined modern slavery as:

This study makes three important and novel contributions to the
SCM field. First, we extend recent reviews of modern slavery studies
(Han et al., 2022; Mehmood et al., 2022) by using Scopus and Web of
Science databases to explore research across the fields of law, human
rights, business ethics, operations management, and SCM. By including
a broader scope of journals from related fields, the result is a holistic
view of modern slavery in a SCM context based on an in-depth analysis
of 106 articles published since 2010. Second, we build on the conceptual
model on modern slavery in supply chains provided by Gold et al.
(2015). Much has happened in research on modern slavery since their
model was developed, and so we use insights from our systematic review
to refine it. Specifically, we introduce business culture and high impact
risk factors like pandemics to the institutional context level; highlight
external stakeholders like recruitment agents and audit firms as integral
to understanding the business context of modern slavery; emphasise
prevention and distinguish between response and remedy in the man­
agement of modern slavery. Third, based on our findings we identify
three contemporary SCM research streams that can inform research on
modern slavery, namely: (1) reshoring (2) industry 4.0 and (3) supply
chain collaboration. We believe that these streams provide ways to
integrate modern slavery research with overarching SCM trends.
The SLR is structured as follows. The next sections will describe the
theoretical underpinnings and the methodology of the review. This will
be followed by a quantitative content analysis of selected articles
focused on modern slavery in supply chains, and then a qualitative
thematic analysis of the same papers. Finally, conclusions are drawn by
outlining gaps in the literature and suggesting avenues for future
research in the SCM domain.

“the exploitation of a person who is deprived of individual liberty
anywhere along the supply chain from raw material extraction to the
final customer for service provision or production” (p.5, Gold et al.,
2015).
This definition has been adopted across a number of subsequent
studies (Benstead et al., 2018; Stevenson and Cole, 2018; Rogerson et al.,
2020; Caruana et al., 2021). In the SCM literature, modern slavery has
been argued to include forced labour but exclude servitude and human
trafficking, since they happen outside the supply chain. However, Van
Buren et al. (2021) notes that the definition of human trafficking is all
encompassing, since it “includes all links in the human supply chain”,
not excluding the recruitment of workers, as well as forced or coerced
exploitation and exploitation through deception, abuse of power or
vulnerability. Crane et al. (2021) noted that modern slavery usually
manifests as forced labour, debt bondage and human trafficking in a
business context.
In this study we adopt the definition of Gold et al. (2015), but as well
as the product supply chain will also include the human or labour supply
chain (rather than stopping at raw material extraction/product supply
chain) to account for workers that are facing exploitation through
recruitment (see example1). This is when people are recruited through
an employment or recruitment agency, but then find they are charged
additional fees over time and exploited. We also suggest that those who
are exploited are deprived of their individual liberty, and by liberty we
mean freedom from oppression. The definition we put forward of
modern slavery in supply chains is as follows:

2. Theoretical underpinnings
Gold et al. (2015) drew attention to the challenges modern slavery
poses to SCM and provided a framework (Fig. 1). Our aim in this paper is
to conceptually update the framework suggested by Gold et al. (2015).
This is worth doing since substantial new insights have been gained in
the interim years. We aimed for theory elaboration (Fisher and Aguinis,
2017; Gehman et al., 2018), reviewing studies on modern slavery to
elicit novel insights into the phenomenon, in order to reflect and elab­
orate on Gold et al.’s (2015) framework. Seuring et al. (2021) explain
the importance of theory in SLRs. They find four approaches in which
theory can be comprehended in conducting SLRs, and the theory
modification approach best aligns with our study, which “takes a
starting point in some existing constructs but in the abductive process
modifies this in a major fashion, so that new meaning is obtained”
(Seuring et al., 2021). In this emerging research area of modern slavery
in SCM, we have an impression that the field is currently constituted by
its gaps as much as by its achievements, so we aim to also identify the
voids that have not received significant research attention to date, or are
hard to address, and where to find promising research opportunities for
the SCM community. In terms of theoretical contribution (Corley and
Gioia, 2011; Fawcett et al., 2014), we aspire to go beyond explaining
why the phenomena of modern slavery in supply chains happens, to
developing arguments for how we could think about the phenomena and
the interrelationships between its conceptual themes going forward. The
aim is mid-range theorizing (Stank et al., 2017) or intermediate theo­
rizing (Durach et al., 2021), which begins with knowledge that has
accumulated about modern slavery in the specific SCM context. The
themes presented in Gold et al.’s (2015) framework were taken as the
starting point for coding and categorising the themes in our literature

“the recruitment and subsequent exploitation of a person (or a per­
son in chattel or debt bondage slavery), who is deprived of their
individual liberty anywhere along the product, human or labour
supply chain to the final customer for service provision or
production”.
3.2. Systematic literature review
We conducted a SLR, which is a method of collecting and analysing
available literature in a systematic way (Govindan and Hasanagic,
2018). SLRs help researchers to determine the status of a specific field
and reach clear conclusions (Denyer and Tranfield, 2009). We use a
four-step process for conducting our SLR (Seuring and Müller, 2008;
Seuring and Gold, 2012). The four steps are (1) material collection (2)
1

2

Modern slavery victim speaks of exploitation by job agency - BBC News.

V. Strand et al.

Journal of Cleaner Production 435 (2024) 140301

Fig. 1. Conceptualising the challenges of slavery to SCM (Gold et al., 2015).

descriptive analysis (3) category identification and (4) material evalu­
ation. We describe each of these four steps below and present the results
thereafter. We were also mindful of describing the search process as fully
as possible, as recommended by the modified AMSTAR criteria (A
MeaSurement Tool to Assess systematic Reviews) (Carter and Wash­
ispack, 2018), which was developed to assess SLR quality. The SLR
method has been widely used by researchers, including in the field of
sustainability e.g., Koberg and Longoni (2019).

Table 1
Keywords considered for the SLR (Boolean search terms in CAPITALS).

Included
keywords

3.2.1. Material collection
In the first step the material to be analysed is delimited and the unit
of analysis, namely ‘supply chains’, is defined (Koberg and Longoni,
2019). Our articles were delimited to those which were published in
English-language journals and employing keywords that emerged dur­
ing the scoping of the literature (see Table 1). Web of science was used to
test the different keywords for their relevance. All potential keywords
were used, and each keyword was left out in turn to determine if there
was any change in results, along with employing AND/OR Boolean
operators (see Table 1).
The included keywords for supply chain were “suppl*“, “value
chain” and “commodity chain”. “Value chain” is a similar term to supply
chain, often used by economists and employment relations specialists
interested in labour standards, power relations and the global economy
e.g., Gereffi et al. (2005). Since it generated further articles in the
inclusion/exclusion phase of keywords, it was decided to retain it.
“Commodity chain” is a similar term to supply chain and value chain. It
was first used by economists but has since been used in multidisciplinary
global chains research e.g., Lee (2010). Since commodity chain gener­
ated two more articles than “suppl*” and “value chain”, it was retained.
“Supply chain”, “demand chain”, “procurement”, “product chain”,
“production network”, “operation management”, “logistics network”
and “supply network” made no difference to the results, and hence were

Excluded
keywords

‘Modern slavery’ keywords

AND ‘supply chain’
keywords

Modern slavery OR
Human trafficking OR
Forced labo$r/forced labour OR
Labo$r exploitation/labour
exploitation OR
Sweatshop OR
Compulsory labo$r/compulsory
labour OR
Unfree labo$r/unfree labour OR
Debt bondage OR
Child labo$r/child labour OR
Slavery
Sweat factory
Labo$r violation/labour violation
Neo-bondage
Contract slavery

Suppl* OR
Value chain OR
Commodity chain OR

Supply chain
Demand chain
Procurement
Product chain
Production network
Operation management
Logistics network
Supply network
Global economy
Business
Management

excluded from the search. It was also found that potential keywords like
“global economy”, “business” and “management” were too general
terms (as our research focused on supply chains) and were excluded as a
result.
In searching for modern slavery related articles, the keyword
“slavery” was excluded since it generated a large amount of journal
articles based on historical forms of slavery e.g., transatlantic slavery.

3

V. Strand et al.

Journal of Cleaner Production 435 (2024) 140301

Instead, “modern slavery” was included to avoid this problem and
because it is an established term in academic and media discourse.
“Forced labour”, “debt bondage”, “labour exploitation”, “compulsory
labour” and “unfree labour” are similar terms to modern slavery that

explain its exploitative nature within supply chains. All were included
on that basis. “Child labour” was found to be a problematic keyword as it
generated many articles on child labour that did not amount to child
slavery e.g., children working on family farms or other family-run

Fig. 2. Flowchart of the SLR process.
4

V. Strand et al.

Journal of Cleaner Production 435 (2024) 140301

enterprises.
“Human trafficking” is not necessarily the same as forced labour.
However, there are components of human trafficking that can be found
within a supply chain, which other terms of modern slavery might miss.
Hence, it is included in the keyword search terms. “Sweatshop” is a term
used to explain inhumane working conditions in the textile and fashion
industry. It has been included since it may be used instead of other terms
when forced labour is explored within that industry. Terms such as
“sexual exploitation”, “organ harvesting”, “domestic servitude” and
“forced marriage” may fall within the scope of modern slavery but are
outside the scope of our study, as our focus is on business supply chains
and not what happens in domestic settings or in criminal enterprises.

analyses are examined next.
4. Descriptive analysis
In the second step of the Seuring and Müller (2008) process, the
formal characteristics of articles are descriptively assessed. This is done
with the aim of providing background information for the subsequent
categorisation and evaluation of the 106 articles. For the sake of brevity,
we have limited ourselves to reporting the descriptive analysis of pub­
lication date, research context (industry and country), and theoretical
perspectives used.

3.2.2. Inclusion/exclusion criteria
Using the final set of keywords, 686 articles were collected, 378 from
Scopus and 308 from Web of Science. Scopus and Web of Science were
used because they are considered reliable databases for SLRs and can
lead to the identification of different articles (Meho and Yang, 2007;
Schaltegger et al., 2016; Govindan and Hasanagic, 2018). We did not
limit the subject area in Scopus and Web of Science to ‘business, man­
agement and accounting’, as we did not wish to exclude papers on e.g.
human rights, human trafficking, legal issues etc. The publication year
ranged from 2010 to 2023a, as exploratory searches suggested few pa­
pers on modern slavery in supply chains were published before 2010. In
part, this was because there was no government legislation in this area
before 2010 (reporting requirements for large firms were only intro­
duced in the US in 2012 and the UK in 2015) and less societal awareness
of modern slavery in supply chains.
From the initial set of papers, 223 duplicate articles were removed,
leaving 463 articles. The search fields were defined as the article title,
abstracts and keywords (Kraus et al., 2022), and these were read against
the inclusion/exclusion criteria to ensure consistency. If necessary, the
main body of the article was read to determine eligibility for inclusion.
The first 100 abstracts were independently screened by three re­
searchers. When the results were compared, the level of agreement was
over 90%, indicating that our system had good discriminatory power.
One researcher then took responsibility for determining the eligibility of
the remaining 363 articles. Where uncertainty over an article existed,
the other researchers were consulted, and a consensus was reached as to
include or exclude it. A summary of the various steps involved in the
article search and screening process is illustrated in Fig. 2.
As summarised in Fig. 2 articles were excluded from further analysis
if they fell into one of the following categories:

4.1. Year of publication
Fig. 3 shows the number of articles on modern slavery published
each year since 2010. Few studies were published between 2010 and
2015, but the trend has been upward since then. Almost half of all ar­
ticles appeared in 2020 and 2021, which suggests that research mo­
mentum is building behind modern slavery in supply chains. As the
article extraction was conducted in 2021 it is likely that other articles on
modern slavery in supply chains were published that year. Thus, the
number from 2021 is not an accurate representation of published arti­
cles. Based on the data trend, academics are taking notice of modern
slavery and are driving the research agenda forward.
4.2. Journal, academic journal guide (AJG) and field
Table 2 shows the number of times a journal has published an article
on the topic. Interestingly, half of the articles in this SLR were published
by a journal that has published no more than one article on modern
slavery and supply chains. A substantial group of the journals that have
published one article are legal journals e.g., Alternative Law Journal,
however most of the journals that has published two or more articles on
the topic are focused on business or human rights/human trafficking.
Furthermore, Fig. 4 shows that 52 articles were not published by an
AJG ranked journal. This could partially be due to the number of legal
journals that have published in this area, since the AJG only assess
journals that are salient or central to business and management studies.
Most journals that have published on modern slavery and supply chains
and are rated by AJG, have an average AJG rating of 3 and there seems
to be less journals with a higher rating that has chosen to publish in the
area. The reason as to why higher-ranking journals have omitted from
publishing on the topic is unknown, but this could be due to the diffi­
culty of acquiring data, especially primary data, on modern slavery in
supply chains and thus the quality of the work that academics are able to
produce. Since there is an increase in publications on the topic, it will be
interesting to see if future research is published in higher-ranking
journals.
The field in which the journal belongs to was collected for articles
that were AJG ranked. The most prevalent fields were General Man­
agement, Ethics, Gender and Social Responsibility (13), Operations and
Technology Management (10), Social Sciences (9), Sector Studies (6)
and International Business and Area Studies (5). 8 articles were pub­
lished in other fields. As previously mentioned, a portion of the journals
that were non-rated by AJG were legal journals, hence it is likely that
these would fall within a legal field. It is not surprising that the field
encompassing sustainability and ethics is the field that has the most
publications, since modern slavery is often considered an issue of ethics
and sustainability in supply chains (Caruana et al., 2021; Flynn and
Walker, 2021; Rosile et al., 2021). Neither is it surprising that the field
focused on operations management is the field with the second most
publications, since journals and academics in this field are increasingly
attentive to sustainability issues (e.g., Gold et al., 2015; New, 2015;
Flynn, 2020).

⁃ Non-academic articles, articles that were not peer reviewed and grey
literature e.g., newspaper articles, book reviews, conference papers
⁃ Historical articles i.e., studies or evidence collected before 2000
⁃ Articles that did not address modern slavery in a supply chain
context e.g., articles that focused on the wellbeing of people with
lived experience of modern slavery
⁃ Articles on modern slavery activism
⁃ Articles on other forms of slavery like organ harvesting or sex
trafficking
⁃ Articles on child labour that did not amount to modern slavery e.g.,
children working in family businesses or on family farms
⁃ Articles on aspects of sustainability other than modern slavery in
supply chains e.g., environmental sustainability or other social
sustainability
⁃ Articles on sustainability that had an insubstantial section on, or a
variable of, modern slavery
After the abstracts (and main text if the abstract was inconclusive)
were read against the exclusion criteria, 357 of the 463 articles were
excluded. The full text of the remaining 106 articles was reviewed
through a content and thematic analysis. A list of analysed papers in
alphabetic order can be found in Appendix A. The outputs from these
5

V. Strand et al.

Journal of Cleaner Production 435 (2024) 140301

Fig. 3. Number of articles per year.

4.3. Industry setting

the institutional context for the prevention and detection of modern
slavery. Moreover, the representation of these countries in research does
not reflect their risk exposure to modern slavery based on the Global
Slavery Index (Walk Free Foundation, 2018).
However, some country-specific studies did focus on modern slavery
in domestic supply chains. New Zealand and Thailand have had cases of
modern slavery in their fishing and seafood supply chains, which is the
focus of the four articles published on New Zealand (Stringer et al.,
2016a, 2016b, 2021; Stringer and Harré, 2019) and three articles pub­
lished on Thailand (Marschke and Vandergeest, 2016; Wilhelm et al.,
2020; Clark and Longo, 2021). Two articles were published on Slovakia,
one which focuses on a modern slavery case study of Samsung (Andri­
jasevic and Novitz, 2020) and one which addresses the unfree status of
workers posted to Slovakia from their home country (Novitz and
Andrijasevic, 2020). Other country-specific studies involved Argentina
(Dewey, 2018), Bangladesh (Peake and Kenner, 2020), Canada (Haynes,
2020), China (Tang and Zhang, 2019), Ghana (LeBaron and Gore, 2020),
Pakistan (Arslan, 2020), Spain (Chesney et al., 2019) and Turkmenistan
(Korkmaz, 2019). It is clear from the SLR that country specific research
is scarce and there is an opportunity for scholars to conduct more
research on modern slavery in supply chains in specific countries around
the world, especially in Africa.

Some papers focus on specific industry settings. This is because
certain industries have a higher risk of modern slavery in their supply
chains. Specifically non-technological, traditional work such as agri­
culture, mining, textile manufacture, construction and fishing are high
risk industries (Crane, 2013; Gold et al., 2015; Flynn, 2020). The articles
in our analysis were grouped based on the UK government standard
industry classification (SIC). Most articles were not industry specific
(70). The ones that were industry specific focused primarily on the la­
bour intensive and low-skilled industries that have a high risk of modern
slavery. There were 21 articles on agriculture, forestry and fishing e.g.,
(Barrientos, 2013; Stringer et al., 2016a; Chesney et al., 2019; Clark and
Longo, 2021), nine articles on manufacturing such as textiles (Dewey,
2018; Peake and Kenner, 2020; Benstead et al., 2021) and two articles
on construction (Russell et al., 2018; Trautrims et al., 2020a). Although
the public sector is not considered a high-risk industry, four articles were
published using it as the research context (Martin-Ortega, 2017; Sandler
et al., 2018; Rogerson et al., 2020; Meehan and Pinnington, 2021).
These articles focused on the supply chains of public sector organisa­
tions, which are as susceptible to modern slavery risks as the supply
chains of the private sector. Since certain industries have a higher risk of
modern slavery in supply chains, more research can be done on specific
industry settings, particularly industries with high risk goods and a re­
cord of using recruitment agencies.

4.5. Theories adopted in research on modern slavery in SCM
The field of operations and SCM is known to lack a strong, consoli­
dated theoretical base and often borrows theories from other disciplines
(Walker et al., 2015). It is therefore interesting to look at the theoretical
underpinnings of modern slavery in supply chain research. Only 30 ar­
ticles used theory to underpin their arguments, whereas 76 articles had
no theoretical perspectives. Not all research in this review is from the
operations and SCM field, and the lack of theoretical underpinning is at
least partly due to the large number of legal articles generated through
the search.
The most frequently used theory in modern slavery and supply
chains research is institutional theory. It features in five articles e.g.,
(Flynn, 2020; Flynn and Walker, 2021). This is followed by global value
chain theory, which features in four articles e.g., (Stringer and Michai­
lova, 2018; Crane et al., 2019). Critical political economy theory (Leb­
aron and Ayers, 2013a; LeBaron, 2014a), feminist theory (LeBaron,
2015; Andrijasevic, 2021) and social reproduction theory (Gore and
LeBaron, 2019; LeBaron and Gore, 2020) have each been used twice.
Other theories that have appeared once in research include game theory,
principal-agent theory, relational theory and organisational legitimacy

4.4. Country
Modern slavery in supply chains research is often looked at in a
country specific setting due to differences in socio-cultural factors and
preventative efforts e.g., labour legislation, socio-cultural aspects,
country wealth/poverty and democracy – all of which affect the prev­
alence and prevention of modern slavery in supply chains (Crane, 2013).
Most articles did not look at one specific country (42), either because no
specific countries were mentioned or because they looked at multiple
countries. The countries that were explored the most frequently were the
UK with 22 articles, the US with 14 articles and Australia with 11 arti­
cles. Many of the articles from these countries were focused on
country-specific legislation or obligations attached to the legislation e.
g., the UK Modern slavery act, 2015; Mantouvalou (2018); LeBaron and
Ruhmkorf (2019) or Transparency in Supply Chain (TISC) reports from
businesses active in the UK (Flynn, 2020; Monciardini et al., 2021). A
large proportion of articles focused on these countries did not deal
directly with the offence of modern slavery in supply chains but rather
6

V. Strand et al.

Journal of Cleaner Production 435 (2024) 140301

theory.

Table 2
Number of articles published by journals.
Number of times the journal
has published an article

Publication Journal

6

Supply Chain Management: An International
Journal
Australian Journal of Human Rights
Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal;
Anti-Trafficking Review; Business and Society;
Marine Policy
Global Policy; Journal of Human Trafficking
Business and Human Rights Journal; Business
Strategy and Development; Economia AgroAlimentaire/Food Economy; Global Trade and
Customs Journal; International Journal of
Operations and Production Management; Journal
of Business Ethics; Journal of Cleaner Production;
Socio-Economic Review; The Journal of
Development Studies; Third World Quarterly
Alternative Law Journal; Australian Journal of
Management; Business Horizons; Capital and
Class; Catholic University Law Review; Children
and Society; Columbia Journal of Transnational
Law; Company and Securities Law Journal;
Conflict Management and Peace Science;
Corporate Social Responsibility and
Environmental Management; Crime, Law and
Social Change; Critical perspectives on
international business; Critical Sociology;
Economic Systems Research; Environment and
Planning; A European Business Law Review;
European Business Review; European Journal of
Women’s Studies; European Labour Law Journal;
Federal Law Review; Global Networks; Human
Rights Review; Industrial Relations Journal;
International Feminist Journal of Politics;
International Journal of Law and Management;
International Journal of Law, Crime and Justice;
Journal of Business Research; Journal of Common
Market Studies; Journal of Financial Crime;
Journal of International Criminal Justice; Journal
of Labor and Society; Journal of Risk Research;
Journal of Supply Chain Management; Journal of
the American College of Surgeons; Law and Social
Inquiry; Management Science; Multinational
Business Review; Netherlands Quarterly of Human
Rights; New Political Economy; Oñati Socio-legal
Series; Production Planning & Control The
Management of Operations; Regulation &
Governance; Regulation and Governance; Science
Advances; SİYASAL: Journal of Political Sciences;
Social Inclusion; Sustainability; The Business
Lawyer; The George Washington Law Review; The
International Journal of Human Rights; The
Journal of Peasant Studies; The Modern Law
Review; Vanderbilt Law Review

5
4
3
2

1

5. Thematic analysis
We followed a two-step process combining deductive and inductive
approaches for identifying analytic categories (Seuring and Gold, 2012).
First, we deductively established base analytic categories from the
framework of Gold et al. (2015), including institutional context, and
detection and remediation efforts facilitated by capabilities at firm, SC
and business to non-business stakeholder levels (see Appendix B). The
subsequent thematic analysis allowed us to (re)organise the literature
review content (Kraus et al., 2022), and new themes emerged during the
course of analysis, and were added to the coding structure. The themes
were inductively and iteratively refined during the analysis of our
selected articles. Therefore, the final analytic categories used to syn­
thesise the content of the reviewed articles were abductively developed
during the process of completing the literature review. A full list of new
themes and subthemes found in this research (shown in bold italics),
example quotes, and source numbers, is included in Appendix C. The
number of times the themes emerge across articles is also included,
which gives a sense of which are the dominant and less explored themes
within research in modern slavery in SCM to date. Our thematic analysis
allowed for the identification of relevant issues and the interpretation of
results, as discussed below.
5.1. Institutional factors
In order to respond to our research question of how researchers are
approaching research on modern slavery in supply chains, it was
necessary to investigate contextual factors. Scholars suggest that there
are multiple factors affecting the presence and prevalence of modern
slavery in supply chains. LeBaron (2021a) argues that modern slavery in
supply chains is not “a simple consequence of greed or moral short­
comings of individuals”. Instead, it is traceable to factors such as the
supply of highly exploitable workers and demand for their labour that
drive the phenomenon.
The analysis of literature confirmed several institutional context subthemes in Gold et al.’ (2015) original figure shown in Fig. 1, including
industry, geography, and product/commodity. It was confirmed that
several conditions enable modern slavery in supply chains, such as in­
dustry context and geographic context (Chesney et al., 2019; Sieg­
mann et al., 2022; Bodendorf et al., 2023). Regarding specific
products/commodities, it has been found that forced labour is heavily
present in simple non-technological work such as construction,
manufacturing, agriculture, forestry and fishing, wholesale trade, as
well as mining and quarrying (Gold et al., 2015; Stringer and Michai­
lova, 2018; Christ et al., 2020; Blindell, 2021) and certain food products
or commodities contribute to forced labour risks ( Blackstonea et al.,
2023). By contrast, several sub-themes were removed from Gold et al.‘s
framework, such as ‘traditions’ and ‘language’, as evidence was not
identified to support them in the analysis.
Several subthemes were modified from the original framework.
Modern slavery is often found in lower tier supply chains and in the
extraction of raw materials, cultivation, harvesting, production, or the
manufacturing of the products sold downstream (Feasley, 2016; Greer
and Purvis, 2016). Feasley (2016) argues that the existence of forced
labour can be found in any part of the supply chain. This also means that
modern slavery is present in nearly every country. Nevertheless, it is
more likely to take place in developing countries. We adapted the
sub-theme ‘government regulation’ to the ‘regulatory context’ within a
country, such as strict migration laws, which can also facilitate modern
slavery (Stringer et al., 2021).
We also expanded ‘socio-economic conditions’ to include ‘socioeconomic, -cultural and -political context’. Conditions such as
discrimination, conflict, the level of economic development and poverty
are linked to forced labour in supply chains (Feasley, 2016). The kafala

Fig. 4. AJG ranking of journals.

7

V. Strand et al.

Journal of Cleaner Production 435 (2024) 140301

system practised in Qatar up until recently is a case in point. Also, more
recent research has looked at the socio-political arena in the UK con­
struction sector, where responses to modern slavery are discussed and
contested. Pesterfieldc and Rogerson (2023) found that the state and
market logics operate in both conflictual and complimentary ways,
whilst Gutierrez-Huerter et al. (2021) showed the politics of frames and
framing, exposing the interests of actors using particular frames and
framing practices. It is clear from the literature that the institutional
environment quality is negatively associated with the vulnerability to
and prevalence of modern slavery (Moussa et al., 2022).
Several new sub-themes were added to Gold et al.‘s original model,
including business culture and high risk events such as the pandemic. It
has been claimed that the underlying reason for modern slavery in
supply chains is the behaviour of multi-national corporations, in which
they rely on cheap labour, rapid production turnarounds, and narrow
profit margins (Christ and Burritt, 2018). They observe:

5.2. Corporate-stakeholders context
There are a range of actors and stakeholders found within and
outside the supply chain. They all play a role in either preventing,
facilitating, or experiencing the occurrence of modern slavery and
forced labour within supply chains. Stakeholders include the focal firm,
first-tier suppliers, other upstream suppliers, workers, governments,
third parties such as NGOs, recruitment agencies, auditing companies,
social activists and consumers. Therefore, we put them together in a new
corporate-stakeholder theme.
5.2.1. Firm level
The focal firm is often held responsible for forced labour in their
supply chains and can thus be subjected to reputational damage if
modern slavery is discovered (Flynn, 2020). Hence, they have been
given a responsibility to make sure that their own operations and supply
chains are free from exploitative labour conditions. This responsibility
has been reiterated by many stakeholders, such as consumers, media,
and NGOs, through activism with the intention of creating reputational
damage and economic loss, as well as governments through TISC
legislation (Aronowitz, 2019). Firms are adjusting their structures and
practices in response to modern slavery risks e.g., appointing modern
slavery officers, establishing working groups/advisory groups on mod­
ern slavery (Flynn and Walker, 2021). Nevertheless, the impact of
modern slavery allegations on a firms operating performance is not long
lasting, although negative (Yagci Sokat and Altay, 2023). It is also found
that firms put more effort into addressing modern slavery in their supply
chains when they have better sustainability performance, they source
from countries with higher risks of modern slavery, and when media
covers the issue (Geng et al., 2022).

“Slavery, and in particular forced labour and debt bondage, is
prevalent in many business models; however, it is most common in
business organisations characterized by narrow profit margins, la­
bour intensive activities, and where the majority of value is captured
by large companies downstream in the supply chain.” (p. 105, Christ
and Burritt, 2018)
This business culture has been thriving due to globalization and is a
product of neo-liberal capitalist structures that demand faster delivery
times and cheaper goods (Lebaron and Ayers, 2013a; Christ and Burritt,
2018; Greer, 2018). Multi-national corporations have control within the
power-dynamics between them and smaller suppliers, which creates an
environment in which labour exploitation is possible (Crane et al.,
2019). Such a business culture is not necessarily ubiquitous, and may
differ between organisations of different sizes, sectors, countries, and
between public, private and not-for-profit organisations. Such a business
culture should move towards responsible capitalism by balancing the
power in relationships, accepting consequences, and generating profits
ethically (Uddin et al., 2023). While there is a need to understand the
business culture that allows for modern slavery to thrive, there is still a
criminal element to modern slavery that is necessary to address. New
(2015) argues that “no one uses forced labour accidently, or through
negligence or ignorance”. The criminal element of forced labour can
make it difficult to detect, since it is hidden in the shadows (Gold et al.,
2015; New, 2015).
Another new factor affecting modern slavery is high impact risk
events such as the pandemic, which showcased the fragility of supply
chains and highlighted the unsafe and precarious working conditions of
workers upstream, but also workers in developed countries. It has been
observed that:

5.2.2. Supply chain level
Suppliers at different tiers of the supply chain will have to comply
with the code of conduct of the focal firm and are often monitored by
focal firms through audits and other due diligence measures (Benstead
et al., 2021). Monitoring can lead to information sharing between
companies, which can furthermore lead to collaboration between the
first-tier supplier and the focal firm (Gold et al., 2015). However, there is
an imbalance in the power structures between the focal firm and sup­
pliers (Crane et al., 2019; Benstead et al., 2021) This can be addressed by
involving third parties in the prevention, detection and remediation
phases (Benstead et al., 2021). Most focal firms expect their first-tier
suppliers to make sure that no modern slavery is present further up­
stream the supply chain as part of a “cascade” approach to managing the
issue (Rogerson et al., 2020; Flynn and Walker, 2021; Emberson et al.,
2022).
Much of the risk of modern slavery lies further down the supply chain
(Rogerson et al., 2020). Some firms choose to work with their suppliers
to reach their tier 1+n suppliers and other firms choose to directly target
beyond first-tier suppliers if they deem it necessary (Stevenson and Cole,
2018). The complexity of global supply networks makes it near impos­
sible to track and monitor every supplier upstream to identify modern
slavery practices, even for businesses committed to tackling modern
slavery (Benstead et al., 2018; Christ and Burritt, 2018).
Certain firms have contractual provisions prohibiting subcontracting. However, if the supplier is pressured to produce more at
short notice or reduce costs, they may choose to utilize unauthorized
sub-contracting (Stringer and Michailova, 2018; Stringer et al., 2021).
Knowledge of who supplies the suppliers of a firm is difficult to access
due to the prevalence of sub-contracting (Christ and Burritt, 2018).
Focal firms and suppliers are often reluctant to give information on other
tiered suppliers due to competition, although this argument has been
debunked (New, 2015). This can leave businesses unaware of the source
of the product and the workers connected to it. Upstream and
sub-suppliers are less likely to be targeted for audits and other due dil­
igence measures than first-tier suppliers (Stevenson and Cole, 2018;

“The COVID-19 pandemic is increasing the vulnerability of workers
to find themselves in exploitative conditions and in modern slavery
as the most extreme form of exploitation.” (p.1065, Trautrims et al.,
2020b)
Covid-19 has “caused extreme shifts in demand patterns, disrupted
supply flows, and diminished the effectiveness of risk management and
mitigation mechanisms”, which in turn has increased workers’ vulner­
ability and thus susceptibility to forced labour (Trautrims et al., 2020b).
The shift in demand due to Covid-19 meant that new industries could be
considered to have a high-risk of modern slavery such as personal pro­
tective equipment (PPE) (Christ and Burritt, 2021). The pandemic has
also acted as a “double edged sword” where less audits and other due
diligence measures were conducted (Fellows and Chong, 2020; Christ
and Burritt, 2021). Nevertheless, it is argued that the pandemic provides
an opportunity to change current SCM practices to benefit workers’
safety and dignity, e.g., through reshoring (Trautrims et al., 2020b).

8

V. Strand et al.

Journal of Cleaner Production 435 (2024) 140301

Ford and Nolan, 2020). This is problematic since there is a growing body
of evidence that suppliers upstream, where sub-contracting is the
highest, are more likely to be using forced labour since they cannot meet
the low consumer prices and the rising cost of raw materials (Stringer
and Michailova, 2018).

5.3.1. Prevention efforts
Prevention efforts such as disclosure required by regulation, codes of
conduct, and certifications, place the onus for prevention on firms. As
the following sections discuss, such prevention efforts have mixed suc­
cess, but regardless of whether the initiatives are effective in preventing
modern slavery or not, the original aim of such initiatives was preven­
tion. Some firms adopt these initiatives as a means of risk avoidance,
particularly reputational risk, which is one of the downfalls of such
measures (Bayne et al., 2022). It very much depends on the individual
business and its approach to such prevention efforts. At the very least,
modern slavery reporting has put firms under the public spotlight and
prompted them to make improvements in supply chain management
that would otherwise not have happened.

5.2.3. Business-non-business stakeholder level
We modified Gold et al.’s (2015) ‘business-non-business partnership
level’ to replace partnership with stakeholders, being those external
stakeholders outside the buyer-supplier relation. Our findings highlight
external stakeholders to the traditional supply chain, including:
(i) recruitment agencies that workers who experience modern
slavery and debt-bondage are often employed through (LeBaron
and Ruhmkorf, 2019; Wilhelm et al., 2020; Stringer et al., 2021)
(ii) third-party organisations e.g., NGOs, that work with focal firms
to detect and remediate modern slavery (Benstead et al., 2018,
2021)
(iii) social activists or consumers who third-party organisations and
legislation try to mobilise in order to make changes to the prac­
tices of supply chains, although there is mixed evidence that this
translates to consumer action (Gold et al., 2015; New, 2015;
Koekkoek et al., 2017; Aronowitz, 2019; Caruana et al., 2021;
Islam and Van Staden, 2022; Lusty et al., 2022; Stringer et al.,
2022b)
(iv) governments which, depending on the country, facilitate modern
slavery in supply chains through corruption or migration laws or
try to prevent it from happening through legislation and raising
awareness (Greer and Purvis, 2016; Crane et al., 2019; Stringer
et al., 2021) and
(v) auditing companies that try to detect and remediate modern
slavery in business supply chains, but who face questions over
their effectiveness and independence (Christ et al., 2019).

5.3.1.1. Disclosure required by legislation. TISC legislation, codes of
conduct and modern slavery statements are efforts introduced by busi­
nesses and governments to prevent modern slavery in supply chains.
TISC legislation has evolved over time, and some examples include the
California Transparency in Supply Chains Act (2010), the UK Modern
slavery act (2015), and the Australian Modern slavery act (2018).
Although these legislations vary in their scope and jurisdiction, they
have in common that businesses operating within a certain geographic
location, with an annual turnover larger than a specified sum, must
publicly report on actions to tackle modern slavery within their supply
chains (Gold et al., 2015; New, 2015). This approach has received
criticism for being “light-touch” regulation. TISC legislation is ulti­
mately reliant on experimentalist governance such as third-party
activism, reputational damage, and consumer behaviour changes
rather than criminal liability and enforcement mechanisms (New, 2015;
Greer and Purvis, 2016; LeBaron and Ruhmkorf, 2017, 2019; Flynn,
2020; Rogerson et al., 2020).
Passing responsibility on to firms to tackle modern slavery can be
problematic, since it “represents a retreat of the state from its proper
role” (New, 2015). LeBaron and Ruhmkorf (2017) believe that punitive
legislation that creates criminal corporate liability, such as the UK
Bribery Act (2010), would be more suitable. However, the principle of
loosely regulated transparency legislation is to allow firms to adopt
approaches that works well with their firm. TISC legislation is thus based
on businesses adopting best practices of transparency through a “race to
the top” approach (Stevenson and Cole, 2018). Although there is evi­
dence of high levels of compliance to minimum requirements of TISC
legislation, and an increase in the extent and quality of disclosures it is
also found that companies reinforce the “status quo” of defensive reas­
surance rather than offering impactful change, and provide in­
consistencies in reporting on the effectiveness of actions (Birkey et al.,
2018; Meehan and Pinnington, 2021; Christ and Burritt, 2023; Mai et al.,
2023; Moussa et al., 2023). Furthermore, there seems to be a shift in
regulation, where newly introduced legislation goes beyond TISC
disclosure and focus on due diligence, penalties for poor or
non-compliance, and product bans (Krajewski et al., 2021; McGaughey
et al., 2022; Fruscione, 2023; Lafarre, 2023). An early assessment of
such legislation indicates a “race to the top”, and may therefore succeed
where TISC legislation falls short (McGaughey et al., 2022). Neverthe­
less, it can also serve to enhance the legitimacy of due diligence tech­
niques which are already criticised (Nolan, 2022).

With regards to business-non-business stakeholders, it has been
observed that:
“If businesses and enterprises do not voluntarily self-regulate, and if
legislation and enforcement are inadequate to deter trafficking or
labour exploitation, consumers and workers may have to directly
advocate for change. Advocacy campaigns aim to elevate consumer
awareness with the purpose of altering consumer behaviour.” (p.
156, Aronowitz, 2019)
Specifically, what is missing in the Gold et al. (2015) framework and
in many other studies in the field is the voice of workers. Situations that
can leave a worker vulnerable to modern slavery includes poverty,
debt-bondage and their migration status (LeBaron, 2014a; Stringer
et al., 2021). Workers can also be vulnerable due to being a child, and it
is found that gender plays a role in forced labour in supply chains as
women are disproportionately affected by it (Berlan, 2016; LeBaron and
Gore, 2020; Vijeyarasa, 2020).
5.3. Efforts to tackle modern slavery
There has been a range of efforts by different stakeholders in supply
chains to tackle modern slavery. While Gold et al. (2015) framework
considers detection and remediation, we extend these themes to
encompass prevention, detection, response and remediation efforts.
These are important for focal firms, not only for their moral obligation to
protect workers from exploitative situations, but as a response to being
held responsible for precarious working conditions of suppliers up­
stream (Stevenson and Cole, 2018). There is, however, little agreement
on the most effective way to approach the issue of modern slavery in
supply chains (Christ and Burritt, 2018).

5.3.1.2. Code of conduct. Codes of conduct that reference modern
slavery have been present in many business strategies before ‘manda­
tory’ modern slavery reporting was introduced through TISC legislation
(Koekkoek et al., 2017). Codes of conducts are never going to overcome
modern slavery unless they are followed up by corporate action and
combined with improved regulation at both national and international
levels (Christ, Rao and Burritt, 2019). Codes of labour practices fail to
reach the most vulnerable workers, specifically those employed by labor
contractors and do not tackle issues like freedom to join a trade union
9

V. Strand et al.

Journal of Cleaner Production 435 (2024) 140301

(Barrientos, 2013).

manner, private auditors have little power to change the situation of
forced labour (Aronowitz, 2019).

5.3.1.3. Training. Modern slavery is central to business decisions, spe­
cifically those related to the supply practices. Therefore, modern slavery
awareness needs to be filtered through the organisation and this could
be achieved through training all levels and departments (Benstead et al.,
2018). Furthermore, training supports anti-slavery polices to achieve
the desired effect. However, little has been done to expand training
beyond procurement staff to the company and its supply chain as part of
making it standard practice (Martin-Ortega, 2017). Furthermore, most
of the companies only report on the scale of their training program and
not its effectiveness (Dean and Marshall, 2020).

5.3.2.2. Technology. Technology has been increasingly used to improve
worker voice and transparency in supply chains, which are both
important to detect cases of modern slavery (Ford and Nolan, 2020;
Rogerson et al., 2020). Blockchain is a new technology that creates a
record of every moment of a product journey through the supply chain
(Christ and Helliar, 2021). Considering opacity in supply chains is one of
the main reasons why modern slavery exists, end-to-end transparency
within a supply chain could help reduce abuses (Christ and Helliar,
2021). Nevertheless, few firms are seeking to use blockchain technology
beyond tier 1 due to the complexity of the supply chain. This could also
be due to the focal firms needing to protect their proprietary information
(Christ and Helliar, 2021). Blockchains can also capture an ‘objective’
score of working conditions, which are obtained through digital worker
engagement tools (Berg et al., 2020).
Technologies that can be used to extract information of modern
slavery in supply chains include, but are not limited to, satellite pictures,
big data analytics, mobile phones, machine learning and the Internet of
Things (Gold et al., 2015; Berg et al., 2020). Mobile-phone-based tech­
nologies can be used to collect worker feedback, empower workers and
improve employment standards (Berg et al., 2020; Ford and Nolan,
2020). Furthermore, Jiang et al. (2023) found that firms tend to promote
high-complexity technology from normative pressures by NGOs and
low-complexity technology from coercive pressures by governments.

5.3.1.4. Certifications. Certifications are a principal means through
which firms signal their efforts to combat modern slavery across product
categories as diverse as cotton, coffee, timber, fish and diamonds (Flynn
and Walker, 2021). The heavy reliance of multinational corporations on
certification as a main mode of governing sustainability in their global
supply chains has come under scrutiny (Wilhelm et al., 2020). Certifi­
cation schemes are reliant on the available data about product sourcing.
Yet it is impossible to guarantee slave free sourcing or to prevent
underreporting of modern slavery incidences. Therefore, certification
schemes seem to be an ineffective means of combating modern slavery
and may amount to little more than superficial demonstrations of con­
formity with expected corporate behaviour (LeBaron and Gore, 2020;
Caruana et al., 2021).
5.3.2. Detection efforts
A number of detection efforts have been identified in the SLR,
including audits, technology and whistleblowing, discussed below.

5.3.2.3. Whistleblowing. Whistleblowing is underused and has received
only very limited attention in the SCM literature, even though it can be a
valuable weapon in the fight against modern slavery (Stevenson, 2021).
Whistleblowing facilities should be made available to members of the
public, workers, people with lived experiences, suppliers, and corporate
staff. In reality, according to Blindell (2021), whistleblowing mecha­
nisms tend to be limited to company employees as opposed to workers
throughout the supply chain. Whistleblowing mechanisms should
include dedicated hotlines, email addresses and other electronic devices
that can be used to report any unethical and illegal activity anonymously
(Esoimeme, 2020).

5.3.2.1. Audits. Audits are often used by companies to ensure compli­
ance with codes of conduct (Ford and Nolan, 2020). Through an audit,
the supplier is investigated for its working conditions through docu­
ments reviews, site tours, and interviews with managers and workers to
understand whether there could be risks of forced labour and exploita­
tion present (Ford and Nolan, 2020; Benstead et al., 2021). Benstead
et al. (2021) observed that targeted audits are more likely to identify
indicators of modern slavery. Collaboration between businesses and
NGOs is also found in the auditing process. NGOs can offer expertise in
the field, and they can continue working with the suppliers if any in­
dicators of modern slavery are found (Benstead et al., 2018).
There is scepticism over the effectiveness of audits. Audits can be
announced or unannounced (Ford and Nolan, 2020). Announced audits
are more likely to be biased, with active deceit from managers of illicit
practices (New, 2015; Stevenson and Cole, 2018). Suppliers can use
commonly occurring business mechanisms, adjust accounting books,
allow only certain people in work during the audit, determine who is
interviewed by auditors, and re-locate production to unknown ‘shadow
factories’ to avoid the detection of modern slavery (Gold et al., 2015;
New, 2015; Benstead et al., 2021). Still, Benstead et al. (2021) argue that
announced audits will help to build trust between the supplier and focal
firm, and the trust will improve the supplier’s implementation of any
corrective actions needed.
There is a power imbalance between suppliers and focal firms that is
unlikely to be remediated without the presence of an NGO. Moreover,
the multitude of varied and changing audit requirements can create
confusion and audit fatigue for the suppliers (Benstead et al., 2021).
Ford and Nolan (2020) state that “the use of social auditing could result
in cosmetic, shallow or narrow, self-legitimating, compliance-oriented
responses by firms” where the auditors are trying to prove that some­
thing is not there instead of finding things out (Christ and Helliar, 2021).
Furthermore, audits might be constructed and executed in ways that
conceal problems of forced labour instead of bringing them to light
(Stevenson and Cole, 2018). Even if audits are conducted in an ethical

5.3.3. Response and remedy efforts
We differentiate between response and remediation phases after
modern slavery has happened. Response is defined as the reaction to the
incident and can be a verbal or written statement or a specific course of
action e.g., contract termination. Remediation, on the other hand, is ‘the
action of remedying something, of reversing or stopping its damage
through remedial training or therapy’ (Collins Dictionary, 2022). Due to
this, it is likely that response efforts will be attempted prior to remedi­
ation efforts.
For instance, Benstead et al. (2021) discussed detecting and reme­
diating modern slavery in supply chains through a targeted auditing
approach. The boundary between the first response of a company after
modern slavery is detected and then remediation practices for suppliers
and people with lived experiences are either blurred or missed. In Ste­
venson and Cole’s (2018) model that encompasses detection and
remediation practices, there is no direct consideration of people with
lived experiences and the remediation process that should be available
to them. Most companies are reluctant to disclose if they have modern
slavery in their supply chains, likely because they are fearful of stake­
holder responses. Thus, there is little transparency with detected cases of
modern slavery and, therefore, little transparency with examples of
response and remediation. Nevertheless, some focal companies are
transparent in their reporting of detected cases, and remedy and
response efforts. Nestlé decided to publicly speak out about instances of
forced labour in their fisheries supply chains (Stringer and Michailova,
2018; Stringer et al., 2021) and Flynn and Walker (2021) found that
10

V. Strand et al.

Journal of Cleaner Production 435 (2024) 140301

“where modern slavery is uncovered, 53.5 per cent of FTSE 100 firms
and 29 per cent of FTSE 250 firms have remediation procedures to deal
with it”. However, few companies emphasise response and remediation
for tier 1+n suppliers (Stevenson and Cole, 2018).

potential to jointly combat modern slavery and bring positive change to
an industry”. There is a slower adoption of the joint action
worker-driven program when the farmer size is heterogeneous, and a
faster adoption when the buyer size is heterogeneous.
Non-compliant suppliers may be subjected to additional audits and
action plans, and firms could collaborate with other stakeholders in a
multi-stakeholder initiative and provide remediation training to develop
their own organisation and suppliers (Benstead et al., 2021). Corrective
action plans are the most common remediation to non-compliance
(Stevenson and Cole, 2018), and we consider them remediation rather
than an immediate response as they seek to correct or remedy the sit­
uation over time. However, for action plans to work in a remediating
manner, they should also be worker centred and facilitate for rehabili­
tation and reintegration of survivors into the labour market (Blindell,
2021). Gold et al. (2015) put forward that multi-stakeholder initiatives
such as disseminating and imitating industry best practices, and
community-centred approaches such as culturally sensitized learning, as
remediation approaches. Although collaboration e.g., multi-stakeholder
initiatives, can act as a form for remediation effort, we believe that the
remediation efforts suggested by Gold et al. (2015) were more preven­
tative. Remediation practices need to be more clearly defined in a
survivor-centric approach, and successful remediation efforts can then
facilitate robust prevention and detection efforts, shown in feedback
arrows in the model.

5.3.3.1. Response efforts
5.3.3.1.1. Worker related response. Worker related responses that
focal firms can engage with includes e.g., to compensate workers that
have been financially exploited or paid recruitment fees, or rescue
workers if they are subjected to working standards amounting to modern
slavery (Aronowitz, 2019; Benstead et al., 2021; Chin, 2023). Never­
theless, compensation is not always required by law and there is found to
be little TISC statement disclosure of any provision or policy for the
welfare of people with lived experiences of modern slavery (Man­
touvalou, 2018; Blindell, 2021).
5.3.3.1.2. Supplier related response. Some companies decide to give
a warning to suppliers that show signs of modern slavery whilst others
decide to terminate the contract and switch supplier (Benstead et al.,
2018, 2021; Aronowitz, 2019). However, New (2015) found that
warnings and continual engagement with suppliers using forced labour
could make firms directly complicit in criminal activity. Firms can also
decide to stop sourcing from the region where modern slavery is
detected, but this could lead to detrimental socio-economic effects (Gold
et al., 2015; Benstead et al., 2021). This specific supplier related
response effort is the only response effort that Gold et al. (2015)
mentioned. Another response effort is to withhold payment to the sup­
plier until remedial corrective action has been taken (Aronowitz, 2019).
However, Stevenson and Cole (2018) found that some businesses
acknowledge how their behaviour contribute to modern slavery by e.g.,
claiming that they would not withhold payments to their suppliers.
Hence, it is clear that effective supplier related response efforts are
disputed.
5.3.3.1.3. Authority related response. Focal firms can choose to
report instances of modern slavery to the relevant authorities and help
victims through formal proceedings towards prosecution. Interestingly,
few companies state in their modern slavery statements that they would
report violations to authorities (Stevenson and Cole, 2018). This goes
directly against New (2015) argument that authorities should be
involved if modern slavery is detected, due to the illegality and severity
of modern slavery. There are however instances where government has
been contacted about modern slavery practices and have “refused or
failed to cooperate with regulators to varying degrees” (Aronowitz,
2019). This is worrying, but not surprising, since modern slavery in
supply chains can also be state governed (Feasley, 2016; Korkmaz,
2019).

6. Discussion and conclusion
This literature review study sought to answer two research questions,
which are discussed in the sections below.
6.1. What research currently exists on modern slavery in supply chains?
This paper reviews the recent research on modern slavery, and the
previous findings sections presented the analysis of literature in seeking
to answer this research question. As the thematic analysis is the focus of
the second research question, we provide a brief summary of the find­
ings of the descriptive analysis here, especially focusing on the gaps.
Overall, the descriptive analysis showed the different aspects and trends
of modern slavery in supply chains research. It is clear that the field is
underdeveloped in its number of publications, with few articles before
2015 then an upward trajectory. The industry focus is also limited to
mainly agriculture, forestry, fishing, textiles, and construction sectors.
The country focus has room for expansion, with the majority of studies
in the UK, US and Australia focusing on responses to specific legislation,
and a lot fewer country-specific studies. There is a lack of theoretical
underpinning across the articles, and the most frequently adopted the­
ories were institutional theory (5 articles) and global value chain theory
(4 articles). With regards to methods, more studies collecting primary
data with the direct voices of people with lived experiences of modern
slavery, unions and workers are needed in the field. We strongly suggest
getting away from secondary data analysis by introducing first-hand
accounts and experiences.

5.3.3.2. Remedy efforts. Appropriate ways to hear the voice of workers
and people with lived experiences of modern slavery in remediation
phases is needed. The current focus is on response and remediation at
supplier level rather than worker level. More is needed on accessible
grievance mechanisms and providing clear processes for resolving
complaints and consulting with those impacted (Nolan and Frishling,
2019; Simpson et al., 2021). While the literature is weak on people with
lived experiences’ remediation processes, it does cover collaborative
approaches between the buyer and supplier to remediate unfair labour
practices. Few remediation practices that clearly include survivor voi­
ces, their remediation processes, and the necessary follow ups, were
found. Part of this is down to legislation and its failure to increase
prosecutions and provide adequate remedies to people with lived ex­
periences (Mantouvalou, 2018). Recent studies have explored the suc­
cessful intervention against modern slavery through an innovative joint
action worker-driven program, the Coalition of Immokalee Workers Fair
Food Programme (FFP) (Rosile et al., 2021; Kunz et al., 2023). Kunz
et al. (2023) looked at the replicability of FFP and found that “a
well-designed programme using market-based incentives has a strong

6.2. How has modern slavery in supply chains been approached by
researchers, and how could Gold et al.’s (2015) model be updated?
We have synthesised the findings of a range of studies by researchers
of modern slavery in supply chains. Based on the thematic analysis, we
present our model which took its base analytic factors from Gold et al.
(2015) model. We elaborated upon the model presented below in Fig. 5,
and through a process of abduction, we were able to reflect on the
original themes in the model. Some themes were confirmed in our
analysis and remain in normal font (e.g. industry is confirmed), some
themes were removed (e.g. languages is removed), some themes were
modified and are shown in bold italics (e.g. government regulations
becomes regulatory context) and some new themes were added and are
11

V. Strand et al.

Journal of Cleaner Production 435 (2024) 140301

Fig. 5. Conceptual model on modern slavery in supply chains as an extension of Gold et al. (2015) model [The bold italic themes and subthemes newly emerged
during our analysis (Appendix C), and were added to the revised conceptual model].

shown in bold italics (e.g. we add ‘High risk events e.g. pandemic’).
These revised themes flesh out the framework of Gold et al. (2015).
In the institutional context, the themes of geography and socioeconomic conditions (modified to socio-economic context and sociocultural context) were confirmed (e.g., Gold et al., 2015; Chesney
et al., 2019). Newer research also illustrated the socio-political arena as
a theme in the institutional context (e.g., Gutierrez-Huerter et al., 2021;
Pesterfieldc and Rogerson, 2023). We also found that the traditional
business culture based on short lead time and low cost play an important
role in modern slavery occurrence (e.g., LeBaron and Ayers, 2013b;
Christ and Burritt, 2018; Crane et al., 2019). The dominant sub-themes
were business culture (n = 21), industry (n = 29), and regulatory context
(n = 23). Furthermore, high impact risk events such as a pandemic can
influence modern slavery incidences (e.g., Trautrims et al., 2020b;
Christ and Burritt, 2021). Therefore, the whole institutional context
should be seen as dynamic rather than static.
Within the model, Gold et al. (2015) put capabilities at firm, supply
chain and business-non-business stakeholder levels. We have renamed
this aspect the corporate-stakeholder context and confirmed research
has addressed modern slavery issues fairly evenly across the different
levels (firm n = 17, supply chain n = 25, business-non-business stake­
holder n = 27). We also add detail to the business-non-business stake­
holder sub-theme, identifying recruitment agencies, auditing
companies, consumers and government as important stakeholders for
firms tackling modern slavery, and identify which key stakeholders are
most influential at each phase of the model. For example, firms and
suppliers play an important role across all phases, audit companies have
a role in detecting and remediating modern slavery in supply chains, and
consumers are most likely to be interested in the remedy efforts made by
firms and suppliers.
Gold et al. (2015) had two phases in the management of modern

slavery in supply chains: detection and remediation. We reconceptualize
these phases to include prevention, detection, response, and remedy
efforts, and identify new sub-themes within each of the phases. These
phases will involve different actors at firm, supply chain and external
stakeholder levels. Prevention efforts include disclosure due to regula­
tion and legislation (e.g., Stevenson and Cole, 2018; Flynn, 2020; Rog­
erson et al., 2020), which was the sub-theme that emerged most strongly
across articles (n = 52). Other prevention efforts include training (e.g.,
Martin-Ortega, 2017; Benstead et al., 2018), codes of conducts (e.g.,
Koekkoek et al., 2017; Christ et al., 2019), and certification (e.g., Wil­
helm et al., 2020; Flynn and Walker, 2021). Detection efforts include
audits despite them receiving much criticism from researchers and
practitioners (e.g., Ford and Nolan, 2020; Benstead et al., 2021; Christ
and Helliar, 2021). Technology is increasingly playing an important part
in detection efforts (e.g., Berg et al., 2020; Christ and Helliar, 2021) and
so is whistleblowing, although it is underutilised and under researched
(e.g., Esoimeme, 2020; Stevenson, 2021).
Previous literature has not differentiated between the two phases of
response and remedy after modern slavery has happened, but we feel it
is a useful distinction, even if there will inevitably be some overlap. Most
literature tends to miss the response phase and jump to the remediation
phase or use one instead of the other (Gold et al., 2015; Stevenson and
Cole, 2018; Benstead et al., 2021). This could be one of the reasons the
response and remediation phase has remained under researched (n < 15
for all sub-themes) We suggest looking to supply chain risk management
literature to shed light on the definition and differentiation of the
response and remedy phases in a survivor-centric approach. We also
believe this is a live dynamic model rather a static model, and that
lessons learnt from response and remedy phase should feed into the
prevention and detection phases.

12

V. Strand et al.

Journal of Cleaner Production 435 (2024) 140301

6.2.1. Gaps in the model
There are a number of gaps in the model, and in research on modern
slavery in SCM to date. Modern slavery can be referred to as ‘hiding in
plain sight’, and likewise there are opaque patches across the research
field and within our framework. Sub-themes identified from few articles
could point to gaps in our understanding, such as the pandemic (n = 5),
or whistleblowing (n = 6).
Compared to prevention and detection, there is a lack of research on
response and remediation, possibly because much of the corporate
approach to managing modern slavery in supply chains comes from a
place of risk avoidance, and is reactive rather than proactive. Also, most
of the response efforts seem negative (e.g. termination, withholding of
payments), and there is the potential for expanding the research and
sub-themes around more positive response efforts.
There is a lack of clarity around what firms say they are doing, and
what they are actually doing to avert modern slavery in supply chains, a
gap between espoused and actual efforts. Just as some corporate sus­
tainability efforts have been criticized as greenwashing, it may be that
‘ethics washing’ exists around modern slavery efforts (Gutierrez-Huerter
et al., 2021, McGrath et al., 2022; Richards, 2022, Pesterfieldc and
Rogerson, 2023). There is also a lack of clarity around how governments
can assist organisations and communicate the risks of modern slavery in
supply chains (Strand and Rinaldi-Semione, 2023).
There is also a gap relating to alternatives to the traditional business
culture that seeks to maximize profit and lower costs providing the
systemic pressures that perpetuate of modern slavery in supply chains.
There is little research on how to change this business culture, and what
the alternatives might be. This massive elephant in the room has been
acknowledged in research (n = 21), and it is clear that something needs
to change around the way we do business, but there is a black hole
around how it might be addressed.

2020). Improved visibility is particularly important for countering
modern slavery, as “discovering” labour rights abuses is a challenge for
focal firms (Pinnington et al., 2023). Analytics tools such as BSI Connect
Screen and Geoquant can help firms identify, quantify, and assess
environment, social and governance (ESG) risks in their supply chains.
Meanwhile, blockchain and biomarker technologies are starting to
provide supply chain actors with enhanced transparency, traceability,
and auditability over product origins (e.g., Gold et al., 2015; Christ and
Helliar, 2021; Lafargue et al., 2022). Despite its promise, questions
around the use of industry 4.0 technologies to police supply chains are
moot. We do not know the extent to which corporations are using in­
dustry 4.0 technologies, how adopters are using them, the effectiveness
of the technologies in preventing, detecting, and responding to risks, or
the challenges associated with their implementation. Attending to these
questions is vital if the SCM community is to understand the role that
industry 4.0 can play in the fight against modern slavery.
6.3.3. Supply chain collaboration
Supply chain collaboration, by which is meant two or more firms
working in partnership, is a strategic response to operating in complex
environments (Min et al., 2005). By collaborating firms get to exchange
proprietary information, conduct joint problem solving, combine re­
sources and capabilities, pool risk and share rewards (Min et al., 2005).
Industry practice suggests that collaboration has a critical role to play in
fighting modern slavery. Many corporations have joined
multi-stakeholder initiatives, which is an admission that the problem
requires co-ordinated industry responses (Flynn and Walker, 2021). We
see this in initiatives like the Joint Alliance for CSR where telecoms firms
co-operate on supplier audits and share information on supply risks.
While collaboration is recognised as a facilitator of sustainable SCM,
research to date has concentrated on its environmental dimension and
overlooked issues like child labour and employee rights (Chen et al.,
2017). Nevertheless, Stringer et al. (2022a) found that firms, as private
governors, seek partnerships with NGOs (dyad and multi-stakeholder) to
deal with instances of modern slavery in their supply chain. This con­
firms the position of Marschke and Vandergeest (2016), that stake­
holders are working together to tackle modern slavery rather than using
the approach of naming and shaming. Furthermore, NGOs are found to
be required actors to bring about change in GVCs in a synergistic way. It
is therefore imperative that more research is done on the relationship
between NGOs and businesses when collaborating to tackle modern
slavery in supply chains (Stringer et al., 2022a). Investigating how and
why firms engage in either multi-party horizontal collaborations with
peers or vertical collaborations with suppliers and/or customers as part
of managing modern slavery risks deserves scrutiny. Our thematic
analysis revealed the importance of stakeholders like NGOs and con­
sultants in verifying employment standards in supply chains. Further
research could therefore expand on governance roles by looking at
NGO-business collaborations through a relational view lens (Walker
et al., 2013). We suggest that research pays particular attention to these
types of collaborations.

6.3. Modern slavery and contemporary supply chain research trajectories
Building on our systematic review, we identify three SCM lines of
inquiry that can inform empirical and theoretical understanding of
modern slavery in supply chains, namely: reshoring, industry 4.0 and
supply chain collaboration. This is not an exhaustive list, we admit, but
it can help to bring modern slavery into the SCM fold and link it to
contemporary research trajectories.
6.3.1. Reshoring and modern slavery
The relocation of manufacturing from low-cost foreign jurisdictions
back to the home country i.e., reshoring or to a near neighbour country i.
e., nearshoring has generated significant interest in the SCM community
(e.g., Tate et al., 2014; Benstead et al., 2017). Post-pandemic, firms are
planning to focus on resilience efforts, such as reshoring and nearshoring
(Alicke et al., 2020), with Central and Eastern European countries
among the prime destinations for nearshoring (Gadde and Jonsson,
2019). This relocation of production is part of what commentators see as
a new era of “deglobalisation” (Foroohar, 2022). Reshoring also poses
interesting questions for modern slavery. Will it reduce modern slavery
or simply displace it to other locations? And will modern slavery risks
influence reshoring decisions in future? Tate et al. (2014) argue that
reshoring gives corporations better oversight of production and makes it
easier to enforce corporate sustainability policies while Benstead et al.
(2017) and Gadde and Jonsson (2019) suggest that social factors may
have a role to play in future reshoring decisions. By further exploring
these types of questions researchers will be able to shed light on the
implications of reshoring or nearshoring on modern slavery risks.

7. Conclusions
This study conducted a systematic literature review on modern
slavery in SCM, provided an updated definition, and elaborated upon
Gold et al.’s (2015) model. We introduce new factors to the model,
highlight additional external stakeholders, and extend detection and
response by adding prevention and remediation as discrete phases in
managing modern slavery risks.
Our research has several limitations. This SLR is a secondary databased study and does not provide empirical data to the research com­
munity. Although SLRs are considered rigorous, this study focuses on
academic journal articles in English, published after 2010 in Scopus or
Web of Science. Research on modern slavery in supply chains has been
published through other organisations and databases, prior to 2010, and

6.3.2. Industry 4.0 and modern slavery
Injecting visibility into existing supply chain processes and, there­
after, upgrading these same processes is part of the promise of industry
4.0 technologies like internet of things (IoT), artificial intelligence (AI),
data analytics and blockchain (Agrawal et al., 2020; van Hoek et al.,
13

V. Strand et al.

Journal of Cleaner Production 435 (2024) 140301

in other languages than English, thus it is unlikely that this review is
comprehensive of all literature. The selection process (e.g. search terms,
inclusion and exclusion criteria) we followed to identify articles may
have been too restrictive, potentially causing us to exclude relevant
articles. We also sought to elaborate upon Gold et al. (2015) conceptual
model, fleshing out the details from our review of the literature. We may
have missed some occurrences of themes and sub-themes across the
papers, and may have presented the new elements within Gold et al.‘s
model in ways that could be further refined. For example, there is
inevitably overlap between remedy and response phases, but we chose
to present them as separate categories for the sake of conceptual clarity.
In order to scrutinize the robustness of the revised conceptual model, it
would benefit from empirical testing, allowing a further iteration in
theory elaboration.
The study has several implications for future research. We identify a
number of gaps in our revised conceptual model (section 6.2.1), which
could be a starting point for future research directions. We renamed the
centre of Gold et al. (2015) model the corporate-stakeholder context as
numerous studies identified the importance of stakeholders. Yet a
stakeholder theory lens (Freeman, 1984) was not applied in the studies
we reviewed, a theoretical gap that would be worth addressing. Insti­
tutional theory has been adopted to explore sustainable SCM practices
(e.g., Yawar and Kauppi, 2018) and could help to explain organisational
adaptations to modern slavery risks. Some authors have already gone
down this route and found early indications of institutional isomorphism
across corporate structures, policies, and practices for combating mod­
ern slavery (Flynn and Walker, 2021). We recommend that modern
slavery researchers start to align their work with established theoretical
and methodological approaches from SCM. It would also be fruitful to
explore alternatives to traditional business culture, which seem to
perpetuate the conditions for modern slavery. There is also potential in
exploring how corporate stances on modern slavery relate to established
environmental social governance (ESG) aspects. Are “greener” firms
better at tackling modern slavery, for instance, and is there a relation­
ship between how firms manage their own employees and attitudes to
modern slavery in supply chains?
Modern slavery researchers can learn from methodological tech­
niques that elicit primary data on sensitive subjects. Benstead et al.
(2018) action research on supplier auditing in the garment sector is a
case in point. Taking inspiration from this type of fieldwork is crucial
because modern slavery researchers have over-relied on secondary data,
especially modern slavery statements, for their empirical findings (Han
et al., 2022). In terms of primary data collection, there is a need to
represent the perspectives of lower tier suppliers close to the point of
production, and most importantly the voices of people with lived ex­
periences, which are currently missing from research on modern slavery

in supply chains. It would also be beneficial to conduct more quantita­
tive research, using mathematical modelling approaches from data sci­
ence to explore the relationships between the factors that influence
modern slavery in supply chains. We hope this literature review is a step
towards a richer understanding of the current state of modern slavery
research in SCM, and potential future research directions.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Helen Walker: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis,
Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administra­
tion, Resources, Software, Supervision, Validation, Visualization,
Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Anthony Flynn:
Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition,
Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Soft­
ware, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft,
Writing – review & editing. Maryam Lofti: Conceptualization, Data
curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Method­
ology, Project administration, Resources, Software, Supervision, Vali­
dation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review &
editing. Vanja Strand: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal anal­
ysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources,
Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review &
editing, Funding acquisition, Software, Supervision
Notes
a

We conducted the literature review search and analysis in 2021,
and we used the same search procedure to identify and include key 2022
and 2023 papers in the analysis as ad hoc inclusions which were added
in the text and Appendix C.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Acknowledgment
We are grateful for the comments from reviewers on earlier drafts of
this paper.

Appendix A
List of analysed papers in alphabetical order.

S. no

Reference

S. no

Reference

S. no

Reference

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

Abebe and Bessell (2011)
Andrijasevic (2021)
Andrijasevic and Novitz (2020)
Aronowitz (2019)
Arslan (2020)
Barrientos (2013)
Benstead et al. (2018)
Benstead et al. (2021)
Berg et al. (2020)
Berlan (2016)
Birkey et al. (2018)
Blanton et al. (2020)

37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48

Fouladvand (2018)
Fransen and LeBaron (2019)
García-Alaminos et al. (2020)
Gold et al. (2015)
Gore and LeBaron (2019)
Greer (2018)
Greer and Purvis (2016)
Hampton (2019)
Haynes (2020)
Hays (2020)
Hok et al. (2020)
Johnson (2015)

73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84

New (2015)
Nolan and Bott (2018)
Nolan and Frishling (2019)
Novitz and Andrijasevic (2020)
Peake and Kenner (2020)
Planitzer (2016)
Posthuma and Rossi (2017)
Ras and Gregoriou (2019)
Redmond (2020)
Rogerson et al. (2020)
Rosile et al. (2021)
Russell et al. (2018)
(continued on next page)

14

V. Strand et al.

Journal of Cleaner Production 435 (2024) 140301

(continued )
S. no

Reference

S. no

Reference

S. no

Reference

13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36

Blindell (2021)
Burmester et al. (2019)
Caruana et al. (2021)
Chesney et al. (2019)
Christ and Burritt (2021)
Christ and Burritt (2018)
Christ et al. (2020)
Christ and Helliar (2021)
Christ et al. (2019)
Clark and Longo (2021)
Cole and Shirgholami (2021)
Cousins et al. (2020)
Crane et al. (2019)
Davies and Ollus (2019)
Dean and Marshall (2020)
Dewey (2018)
Esoimeme (2020)
Ezell (2016)
Feasley (2015)
Feasley (2016)
Fellows and Chong (2020)
Flynn (2020)
Flynn and Walker (2021)
Ford and Nolan (2020)

49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72

Koekkoek et al. (2017)
Korkmaz (2019)
Landau and Marshall (2018)
LeBaron (2014b)
LeBaron (2015)
LeBaron (2021a)
LeBaron (2021b)
Lebaron and Ayers (2013a)
LeBaron and Gore (2020)
LeBaron and Ruhmkorf (2017)
LeBaron and Ruhmkorf (2019)
Ma et al. (2016)
Mahdiraji et al. (2020)
Mantouvalou (2018)
Marschke and Vandergeest (2016)
Martin (2018)
Martin-Ortega (2017)
Meehan and Pinnington (2021)
Mehra and Shay (2016)
Mende and Drubel (2020)
Mileski et al. (2020)
Monciardini et al. (2021)
Nakamura et al. (2018)
Natta (2021)

85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106

Sandler et al. (2018)
Sarfaty (2020)
Schenner (2017)
Schenner (2018)
Shelley and Bain (2015)
Smith and Betts (2015)
Stevenson (2021)
Stevenson and Cole (2018)
Stringer and Harré (2019)
Stringer et al. (2016a)
Stringer et al. (2021)
Stringer and Michailova (2018)
Stringer et al. (2016b)
Szorenyi (2016)
Tang and Zhang (2019)
Trautrims et al. (2020a)
Trautrims et al. (2020b)
Van Buren et al. (2021)
Vijeyarasa (2020)
Wen and Zhao (2020)
Wilhelm et al. (2020)
Wray-Bliss and Michelson (2021)

Appendix B
Appendix B: Initial coding categories drawn from Gold et al.’s (2015) framework.

Themes

Sub-themes

Institutional context

Industry
Supply chain
Product/commodity
Socio-economic conditions
Culture
Traditions
Government regulation
Geographical situation
Languages
Firm level
Supply chain level
Business-non-business partnership level
Risk monitoring
Triangulation of indicators and data sources
Targeted investigation
Multi-stakeholder initiative
Community centred approach
Supplier development and capacity building

Capabilities
Detection
Remediation

Appendix C
Emerging coding structure and sample evidence [The bold italic themes and subthemes newly emerged during our analysis and were added to the
revised conceptual model in Fig. 5. S=Source number. N = number of articles theme found within].

Theme

Sub-theme

Example quote

S

n

Institutional
Factors

Industry

“Slavery-related practice has also been found to occur to a
greater extent in certain industries. Such industries
generally involve activities that can be classified as low
education labour-intensive, and often dangerous, not
subject to a high level of technological development and
where skilled labour is not required.” (Christ et al., 2020)
“Across the world there are hundreds of thousands of
trafficked people forced to work in controlled
environments where workers can be effectively isolated
and dominated: remote farms, mineral quarries, raw

2, 4, 5, 13, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 26, 32, 40, 57,
60, 63, 69, 70, 71, 77, 84, 85, 87, 88, 93, 96,
97, 99, 100, 105

29

32, 43

2

Lower tier supply chain

(continued on next page)

15

V. Strand et al.

Journal of Cleaner Production 435 (2024) 140301

(continued )
Theme

Sub-theme

Product/Commodity
Socio-economic context (e.g., financial
dependency)

Socio-cultural context

Socio-political context

Business culture

Regulatory context

Geography (e.g., state capacity,
development, conflict, democracy)

High risk events (e.g., covid-19
pandemic)
Corporatestakeholder
context

Firm level

Supply chain level

Business- non-business stakeholder level
(e.g., recruitment agencies, auditing
companies, consumers, governments)

Prevention
Efforts

Disclosure by regulation (e.g.,
domestic and international)

Codes of conduct

Training

Example quote
material mines, off-shore fishing platforms and industrial
sweatshops” (Greer and Purvis, 2016)
“(There is a) high risk of forced labour in the agricultural
production of numerous fruit and vegetable commodities
consumed in the United States” (Blackstonea et al., 2023)
“If the working population of a source-material country is
aggregately poor, there is more likely societal acceptance
of exploitative or forced-labor work situations by citizens
desperate to obtain and maintain employment.” (Feasley,
2016)
“The few studies that have analysed the complex ways in
which exploitation occurs highlight the importance of
socio-cultural context, as well as the value of a political
economy perspective in uncovering and explaining the
nature of exploitation.” (Abebe and Bessell, 2011)
“the issue of modern slavery becomes a political arena
where different sets of actors communicatively compete
and deliberate over its framing and assign moral
legitimacy to their frames” (Gutierrez-Huerter et al.,
2021)
“Slavery, and in particular forced labour and debt
bondage, is prevalent in many business models; however,
it is most common in business organisations characterized
by narrow profit margins, labour intensive activities, and
where the majority of value is captured by large
companies downstream in the supply chain.” (Christ and
Burritt, 2018)
“We have documented important gaps in the jurisdictions
of countries that source migrant workers (in our case,
Indonesia) and those at the receiving end (in our study,
New Zealand). Although state regulations have improved
(particularly in New Zealand), exploitative practices
persist at a systemic level.” (Stringer et al., 2021)
“The formal institutions in developed countries do not
allow for the exploitation of labour in these countries,
many firms have as a result outsourced the jobs to less
developed countries to operate outside the formal
institutional boundaries of their home countries.”
(Arslan, 2020)
“The COVID-19 pandemic is increasing the vulnerability
of workers to find themselves in exploitative conditions
and in modern slavery as the most extreme form of
exploitation.” (Trautrims et al., 2020b)
“Buyers are therefore encouraged to focus on their
internal processes and embed modern slavery awareness
throughout their company by improving purchasing
practices and transparency, and by providing internal
training and resources to support employees at all levels
of the business.” (Benstead et al., 2021)
In the case of modern slavery, the knowledge gained from
an initial collaboration can be used to inform and enhance
the response of individual business actors for improving
standards and transparency within the supply chain.”
(Benstead et al., 2018)
“If businesses and enterprises do not voluntarily selfregulate, and if legislation and enforcement are
inadequate to deter trafficking or labor exploitation,
consumers and workers may have to directly advocate for
change. Advocacy campaigns aim to elevate consumer
awareness with the purpose of altering consumer
behaviour.” (Aronowitz, 2019)
“Acknowledgment of both the scale and illegitimacy of
modern slavery has led to new legislation such as the
California Transparency in Supply Chain Act (2010) in
the United States and the Modern slavery act, 2015 in the
United Kingdom, urging the business community to
prevent modern slavery from entering their supply
chains.” (Caruana et al., 2021)
“Suppliers are often overwhelmed, receiving limited
support to fully understand and meet codes of conduct
and the subsequent lengthy audit corrective action plans
(Flynn and Walker, 2021)
“The modern slavery training (Initiative 4) equips
employees with modern slavery knowledge to support
their day-to-day commercial decisions.” (Benstead et al.,
2018)

S

n

13, 19, 40, 96, a

5

5, 12, 14, 16, 21, 22, 32, 37, 77, 99

10

1, 5, 8, 12, 14, 16, 22, 57, 103

9

b, c

2

2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 18, 19, 21, 22, 25, 42,
43, 54, 56, 68, 96, 99, 102

21

3, 6, 12, 14, 16, 25, 26, 28, 32, 37, 44, 50, 51,
63, 67, 69, 76, 93, 94, 95, 97, 98, 105

23

1, 2, 5, 12, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 32, 47,
77, 85

15

17, 23, 33, 91, 101

5

4, 8, 30, 34, 39, 45, 46, 49, 61, 63, 67, 68, 89,
90, 102, 105, 106

17

7, 8, 18, 21, 25, 26, 29, 32, 36, 39, 40, 43, 46,
47, 49, 54, 59, 61, 63, 71, 84, 88, 96, 100, 105

25

4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 28, 30, 36, 37, 38, 48, 49,
50, 52, 63, 67, 76, 79, 83, 86, 87, 88, 95, 99,
105

27

2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 24, 27, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 40,
42, 43, 46, 47, 49, 51, 58, 59, 60, 62, 64, 65,
66, 70, 72, 73, 74, 75, 78, 80, 81, 82, 86, 92,
103, 104

52

4, 5, 8, 9, 11, 13, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 27, 28, 34,
35, 46, 49, 60, 66, 80, 81, 82, 90, 92

24

4, 7, 13, 29, 60, 89, 92, 102

8

(continued on next page)

16

V. Strand et al.

Journal of Cleaner Production 435 (2024) 140301

(continued )
Theme

Detection Efforts

Sub-theme

Example quote

S

n

Certification programs

“The Rainforest Alliance Sustainable Agricultural
standards, Fair Trade certification labor standards, UTZ
certified draft standards for cocoa, and Starbucks’
COCOA standards are all reportedly in compliance with
the ILO’s standards on child and forced labor.”
(Aronowitz, 2019)
“Due to the limits of social auditing as typically practiced,
the over-reliance on audits in corporate MSA responses
could result in a scheme that generates relatively narrow
reporting by businesses and promotes an unsatisfactorily
shallow, compliance-oriented approach to solving the
problem of modern slavery.” (Ford and Nolan, 2020)
“The use of a blockchain could potentially be a very useful
technology in reducing modern slavery.” (Christ and
Helliar, 2021)
“In the case of modern slavery, given the particular
characteristics of the threat, whistleblowing by workers,
including the victims themselves, is extremely
challenging. Thus, whistle-blowers can be actors internal
to the organisation under suspicion, e.g. the victims or
other employees; actors internal to the supply chain, e.g.
suppliers, customers and logistics providers that interact
directly with the organisation; actors internal to the wider
industrial environment; or actors external to the supply
chain or industry sector, e.g. the general public and local
community. (Stevenson, 2021)
“Evidence also reveals action that has taken place to
remediate the specific issues found during the audit
relating to fees, such as paying compensation to workers.”
(Benstead et al., 2021)
“They include suspending or terminating a relationship;
but these are typically not the first responses by a buying
firm, especially if the supplier provides a critical resource
and there are few alternative providers.” (Stevenson and
Cole, 2018)
“If a buying firm uncovers forced labour in its supply
chain, it is the discovery of serious criminality, and firms
have unequivocal moral obligations (and, in some cases,
potential legal obligations to bring the situation to the
attention of the authorities.” (New, 2015)
“More commonly, buyers will look to develop the
supplier, putting a remediation plan in place to improve
performance. This may involve special measures until
standards have improved, e.g. more regular audits or colocating staff inside the factory and training.” (Stevenson
and Cole, 2018)
“The research also documents the evolving and ongoing
remediation process, which has led to collaboration with
a local NGO to support workers and develop suppliers.”
(Benstead et al., 2021)
A worker-centred approach requires suppliers and brands
to take specific measures in response to feedback,
independently evaluate those measures, and set deadlines
or timeframes for that implementation (Berg et al., 2020)

4, 5, 19, 60, 63, 84, 102

7

4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 29, 36, 38,
40, 73, 88, 92

17

9, 19, 20, 36, 40, 71, 82, 89, 102, 105

10

13, 21, 29, 91, 29, 35

6

1, 4, 8, 36, 45, 62, 79, 83, 85, 105

10

4, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 50, 64, 72, 73, 77, 83, 91, 92

14

4, 8, 16, 18, 20, 30, 37, 46, 63, 73, 92, 100

12

8, 13, 44, 47, 79, 92

6

7, 8, 10, 13, 36, 40, 79, 92

8

3, 4, 9, 13, 36, 71, 75, 79, 83, 85, 91, 102, 105

13

Audits

Technology (e.g., blockchain and
worker voice)
Whistleblowing

Response efforts

Worker related response (e.g., rescue,
establish no-recruitment fee,
compensate)
Supplier related response (e.g.,
withdrawal, withholding payment, do
nothing, follow others)
Authority related response (e.g.,
report to authorities, prosecution)

Remedy efforts

Action plan (e.g., new policies, reauditing, training, rehabilitation, and
reintegration)

Collaboration (e.g., multi-stakeholder
initiative, local NGOs)
Worker centred approach (e.g.,
bottom-up approach, worker-driven
social responsibility)

References

Arslan, M., 2020. Mechanisms of labour exploitation: the case of Pakistan. International
Journal of Law and Management 62, 1–21.
Australia Modern Slavery Act, 2018. Federal Register of Legislation - Modern Slavery Act
2018. Accessed 2 January 2024.
Barrientos, S.W., 2013. ’Labour chains’: analysing the role of labour contractors in global
production networks. J. Dev. Stud. 49, 1058–1071.
Bayne, L., Ng, J., Wee, M., Bayne, L., Ng, J., Wee, M., 2022. Supply chain disclosure:
stakeholder preferences versus current practice in Australia. Account. Finance 62,
3875–3911.
Benstead, A.V., Stevenson, M., Hendry, L.C., 2017. Why and how do firms reshore? A
contingency-based conceptual framework. Operations management research 10,
85–103.
Benstead, A.V., Hendry, L.C., Stevenson, M., 2018. Horizontal collaboration in response
to modern slavery legislation: an action research project. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag.
38, 2286–2312.
Benstead, A.V., Hendry, L.C., Stevenson, M., 2021. Detecting and remediating modern
slavery in supply chains: a targeted audit approach. Prod. Plann. Control 32,
1136–1157.
Berg, L., Farbenblum, B., Kintominas, A., 2020. Addressing exploitation in supply chains:
is technology a game changer for worker voice? Anti-Trafficking Review 14, 47–66.

Abebe, T., Bessell, S., 2011. Dominant discourses, debates and silences on child labour in
africa and asia. Third World Q. 32, 765–786.
Agrawal, M., Eloot, K., Mancini, M., Patel, A., 2020. Industry 4.0: Reimagining
Manufacturing Operations after Covid-19 [Online]. McKinsey & Company.
Available: https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/operations/our-insights/industr
y-40-reimagining-manufacturing-operations-after-covid-19.
Alicke, K., Gupta, R., Trautwein, V., 2020. Resetting Supply Chains for the Next Normal
[Online]. McKinsey & Company. Available: https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities
/operations/our-insights/resetting-supply-chains-for-the-next-normal.
Andrijasevic, R., 2021. Forced labour in supply chains: rolling back the debate on gender,
migration and sexual commerce. Eur. J. Wom. Stud. 28, 4, 410-424.
Andrijasevic, R., Novitz, T., 2020. Supply chains and unfree labor: regulatory failure in
the case of samsung electronics in Slovakia. Journal of Human Trafficking 6,
195–208.
Aronowitz, A.A., 2019. Regulating business involvement in labor exploitation and
human trafficking. Journal of Labor and Society 22, 145–164.

17

V. Strand et al.

Journal of Cleaner Production 435 (2024) 140301

Berlan, A., 2016. Whose business is it anyway: children and corporate social
responsibility in the international business agenda. Child. Soc. 30, 159–168.
Birkey, R.N., Guidry, R.P., Islam, M.A., Patten, D.M., 2018. Mandated social disclosure:
an analysis of the response to the California transparency in supply chains act of
2010. J. Bus. Ethics 152, 827–841.
Blackstone, N.T., Rodriguez-Huerta, E., Sparks, J.D., Blackstone, N.T., RodríguezHuerta, E., Battaglia, K., Jackson, B., Jackson, E., Benoit Norris, C., Decker Sparks, J.
L., 2023. Forced labour risk is pervasive in the US land-based food supply. Nature
food 4, 596–606.
Blanton, R.G., Blanton, S.L., Peksen, D., 2020. Confronting human trafficking: the role of
state capacity. Conflict Manag. Peace Sci. 37, 471–489.
Blindell, L., 2021. Mandatory csr disclosure: an empirical analysis of UK modern slavery
statements. Eur. Bus. Law Rev. 32, 317–354.
Bodendorf, F., Wonn, F., Franke, J., Bodendorf, F., Wonn, F., Simon, K., Franke, J., 2023.
Indicators and countermeasures of modern slavery in global supply chains: pathway
to a social supply chain management framework. Bus. Strat. Environ. 32,
2049–2077.
Bribery Act, 2010. Bribery Act 2010. legislation.gov.uk. Accessed 2 January 2024.
Burmester, B., Michailova, S., Stringer, C., 2019. Modern slavery and international
business scholarship: the governance nexus. Crit. Perspect. Int. Bus. 15, 139–157.
California, 2010. California Transparency in Supply Chains Act.
Carter, C.R., Washispack, S., 2018. Mapping the path forward for sustainable supply
chain management: a review of reviews. J. Bus. Logist. 39, 242–247.
Caruana, R., Crane, A., Gold, S., Lebaron, G., 2021. Modern slavery in business: the sad
and sorry state of a non-field. Bus. Soc. 60, 251–287.
Chen, L., Zhao, X., Tang, O., Price, L., Zhang, S., Zhu, W., 2017. Supply chain
collaboration for sustainability: a literature review and future research agenda. Int.
J. Prod. Econ. 194, 73–87.
Chesney, T., Evans, K., Gold, S., Trautrims, A., 2019. Understanding labour exploitation
in the Spanish agricultural sector using an agent based approach. J. Clean. Prod. 214,
696–704.
Chin, L.C., 2023. Remedying unethical recruitment in Malaysia’s transnational labour
migration governance. JATI-JOURNAL OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN STUDIES 28, 1–27.
Christ, K.L., Burritt, R.L., 2018. Current Perceptions on the Problem of Modern Slavery in
Business, vol. 1. Business Strategy & Development, pp. 103–114.
Christ, K.L., Burritt, R.L., 2021. Accounting for modern slavery risk in the time of covid19: challenges and opportunities. Account Audit. Account. J. 33 (7), 1481–1504.
Christ, K.L., Burritt, R.L., 2023. Exploring effectiveness of entity actions to eliminate
modern slavery risk – early australian evidence. Br. Account. Rev. 55.
Christ, K.L., Helliar, C., 2021. Blockchain technology and modern slavery: reducing
deceptive recruitment in migrant worker populations. J. Bus. Res. 131, 112–120.
Christ, K.L., Rao, K.K., Burritt, R.L., 2019. Accounting for modern slavery: an analysis of
Australian listed company disclosures. Account Audit. Account. J. 32, 836–865.
Christ, K.L., Burritt, R.L., Schaltegger, S., 2020. Accounting for work conditions from
modern slavery to decent work. Account Audit. Account. J. 33, 1481–1504.
Clark, T.P., Longo, S.B., 2021. Global labor value chains, commodification, and the
socioecological structure of severe exploitation. A case study of the Thai seafood
sector. J. Peasant Stud. 1–25.
Cole, R., Shirgholami, Z., 2021. The outlook for modern slavery in the apparel sector in a
post-lockdown economy. Supply Chain Manag. 27 (4), 526–537.
Collins Dictionary, 2022. collinsdictionary.com. Last accessed 2 January 2024.
Cooper, C., Hesketh, O., Ellis, N., Fair, A., 2017. In: OFFICE, H. (Ed.), A Typology of
Modern Slavery Offences in the uk.
Corley, K., Gioia, D., 2011. Building theory about theory building: what constitutes a
theoretical contribution? Acad. Manag. Rev. 36, 12–32.
Cousins, P., Dutordoir, M., Lawson, B., Frota Neto, J.Q., 2020. Shareholder wealth effects
of modern slavery regulation. Manag. Sci. 66, 5265–5289.
Craig, G., 2017. The UK’s modern slavery legislation: an early assessment of progress.
Soc. Incl. 5, 16–27.
Crane, A., 2013. Modern slavery as a management practice: exploring the conditions and
capabilities for human exploitation. Acad. Manag. Rev. 38, 49–69.
Crane, A., Lebaron, G., Allain, J., Behbahani, L., 2019. Governance gaps in eradicating
forced labor: from global to domestic supply chains. Regulation & Governance 13,
86–106.
Crane, A., Lebaron, G., Phung, K., Behbahani, L., Allain, J., 2021. Confronting the
business models of modern slavery. J. Manag. Inq. 1–22.
Davies, J., Ollus, N., 2019. Labour exploitation as corporate crime and harm: outsourcing
responsibility in food production and cleaning services supply chains. Crime Law
Soc. Change 72, 87–106.
Dean, O., Marshall, S., 2020. A race to the middle of the pack: an analysis of slavery and
human trafficking statements submitted by australian banks under the UK modern
slavery act. Aust. J. Hum. Right 26, 46–73.
Denyer, D., Tranfield, D., 2009. Producing a systematic review. In: BUCHANAN, D. (Ed.),
The Sage Handbook of Organizational Research Methods. Sage, London.
Dewey, M., 2018. Domestic obstacles to labor standards: law enforcement and informal
institutions in Argentina’s garment industry. Soc. Econ. Rev. 16, 567–586.
Durach, C.F., Kembro, J.H., Wieland, A., 2021. How to advance theory through literature
reviews in logistics and supply chain management. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist.
Manag. 51, 1090–1107.
Emberson, C., Pinheiro, S.M., Trautrims, A., Emberson, C., Pinheiro, S.M., Trautrims, A.,
2022. Adaptations to first-tier suppliers’ relational anti-slavery capabilities. Supply
Chain Manag. 27, 575–593.
Esoimeme, E.E., 2020. Using the risk-based approach to curb modern slavery in the
supply chain: the anglo american and marks and spencer example. J. Financ. Crime
27, 313–322.

Ezell, L., 2016. Human trafficking in multinational supply chains: a corporate director’s
fiduciary duty to monitor and eliminate human trafficking violations. Vanderbilt
Law Rev. 69, 499–544.
Fawcett, S.E., Waller, M.A., Miller, J.W., Schwieterman, M.A., Hazen, B.T., Overstreet, R.
E., 2014. A trail guide to publishing success: tips on writing influential conceptual,
qualitative, and survey research. J. Bus. Logist. 35, 1–16.
Feasley, A., 2015. Deploying disclosure laws to eliminate forced labour: supply chain
transparency efforts of Brazil and the United States of America. Anti-Trafficking
Review 30–49.
Feasley, A., 2016. Eliminating corporate exploitation: examining accountability regimes
as means to eradicate forced labor from supply chains. Journal of human trafficking
2, 15–31.
Fellows, J., Chong, M., 2020. Australia’s modern slavery act: challenges for a post-covid
world? Alternative Law J. 45, 209–214.
Fisher, G., Aguinis, H., 2017. Using theory elaboration to make theoretical
advancements. Organ. Res. Methods 20, 438–464.
Flynn, A., 2020. Determinants of corporate compliance with modern slavery reporting.
Supply Chain Management-an International Journal 25, 1–16.
Flynn, A., Walker, H., 2021. Corporate responses to modern slavery risks: an institutional
theory perspective. Eur. Bus. Rev. 33, 295–315.
Ford, J., Nolan, J., 2020. Regulating transparency on human rights and modern slavery
in corporate supply chains: the discrepancy between human rights due diligence and
the social audit. Aust. J. Hum. Right 26, 27–45.
Foroohar, R., 2022. My Guide to a Deglobalising World. Financial Times, 21 October
2022.
Fouladvand, S., 2018. Decentering the prosecution-oriented approach: tackling both
supply and demand in the struggle against human trafficking. International Journal
of Law, Crime and Justice 52, 129–143.
Fransen, L., Lebaron, G., 2019. Big audit firms as regulatory intermediaries in
transnational labor governance. Regulation and Governance 13, 260–279.
Freeman, R.E., 1984. Strategic Management : A Stakeholder Approach. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Fruscione, A., 2023. The european commission proposes a regulation to ban products
made with forced labour. Glob. Trade Cust. J. 18, 120–124.
Gadde, L.-E., Jonsson, P., 2019. Future changes in sourcing patterns: 2025 outlook for
the Swedish textile industry. J. Purch. Supply Manag. 25, 100526.
García-Alaminos, Á., Ortiz, M., Arce, G., Zafrilla, J., 2020. Reassembling Social
Defragmented Responsibilities: the Indecent Labour Footprint of Us Multinationals
Overseas. Economic Systems Research.
Gehman, J., Glaser, V.L., Eisenhardt, K.M., Gioia, D., Langley, A., Corley, K.G., 2018.
Finding theory–method fit: a comparison of three qualitative approaches to theory
building. J. Manag. Inq. 27, 284–300.
Geng, R., Lam, H.K.S., Stevenson, M., 2022. Addressing modern slavery in supply chains:
an awareness-motivation-capability perspective. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 42,
331–356.
Gereffi, G., Humphrey, J., Sturgeon, T., 2005. The governance of global value chains.
Rev. Int. Polit. Econ. : RIPE 12, 78–104.
Gold, S., Trautrims, A., Trodd, Z., 2015. Modern slavery challenges to supply chain
management. Supply Chain Management-an International Journal 20, 485–494.
Gore, E., Lebaron, G., 2019. Using social reproduction theory to understand unfree
labour. Cap. Cl. 43, 561–580.
Govindan, K., Hasanagic, M., 2018. A systematic review on drivers, barriers, and
practices towards circular economy: a supply chain perspective. Int. J. Prod. Res. 56,
278–311.
Greer, B.T., 2018. Opaque transparency: why California’s supply chain transparency act
is unenforceable. Onati Socio-Legal Series 8, 32–49.
Greer, B.T., Purvis, J.G., 2016. Corporate supply chain transparency: California’s seminal
attempt to discourage forced labour. Int. J. Hum. Right. 20, 55–77.
Gutierrez-Huerter, O.G., Gold, S., Trautrims, A., 2021. Change in rhetoric but not in
action? Framing of the ethical issue of modern slavery in a UK sector at high risk of
labor exploitation. J. Bus. Ethics. 182 (1), 35–58.
Hampton, D.B., 2019. Modern slavery in global supply chains: can national action plans
on business and human rights close the governance gap? Business and Human Rights
Journal 4, 239–263.
Han, C., Jia, F., Jiang, M., Chen, L., 2022. Modern slavery in supply chains: a systematic
literature review. Int. J. Logist. 1–22 ahead-of-print.
Haynes, J., 2020. The confluence of national and international law in response to
multinational corporations’ commission of modern slavery: nevsun resources.
Journal of Human Trafficking 8 (4), 441–450.
Hays, D., 2020. My brother’s keeper: a framework for a legal obligation to respect human
rights in global supply chains. George Wash. Law Rev. 88, 454–480.
Hok, D.C., Natta, P.M., Acuff, O., Zaharatos, G., 2020. Eradicating forced labour in global
supply chains. Glob. Trade Cust. J. 15, 388–400.
Hughes, A., Brown, J.A., Trueba, M., Trautrims, A., Bostock, B., Day, E., Hurst, R.,
Bhutta, M.F., 2023. Global value chains for medical gloves during the covid-19
pandemic: confronting forced labour through public procurement and crisis. Global
Network 23, 132–149.
Ishaya, B.J., Paraskevadakis, D., Bryde, D., Ishaya, B.J., Paraskevadakis, D., Bury, A.,
Bryde, D., 2023. A systematic literature review of modern slavery through
benchmarking global supply chain. Benchmark Int. J.Vol. ahead-of-print No. aheadof-print.
Islam, M.A., Van Staden, C.J., 2022. Modern slavery disclosure regulation and global
supply chains: insights from stakeholder narratives on the UK modern slavery act.
J. Bus. Ethics 180, 455–479.

18

V. Strand et al.

Journal of Cleaner Production 435 (2024) 140301

Jiang, M., Chen, L., Blome, C., Jia, F., 2023. Digital Technology Adoption for Modern
Slavery Risk Mitigation in Supply Chains: an Institutional Perspective. Technological
Forecasting and Social Change, p. 192.
Johnson, E.C., 2015. Business lawyers are in a unique position to help their clients
identify supply-chain risks involving labor trafficking and child labor. Bus. Lawyer
70, 1083–1122.
Jones, P., Comfort, D., Jones, P., Comfort, D., 2022. Modern slavery statements and the
UK’s largest housebuilding companies: an exploratory research paper. Property
Manag. 40, 658–670.
Koberg, E., Longoni, A., 2019. A systematic review of sustainable supply chain
management in global supply chains. J. Clean. Prod. 207, 1084–1098.
Koekkoek, M., Marx, A., Wouters, J., 2017. Monitoring forced labour and slavery in
global supply chains: the case of the California act on transparency in supply chains.
Global Policy 8, 522–529.
Korkmaz, E.E., 2019. The us ban on turkmen cotton and it’s impact on Turkmenistan’s
trade relationship with Turkey. Siyasal-Journal of Political Sciences 28, 237–255.
Krajewski, M., Tonstad, K., Wohltmann, F., 2021. Mandatory human rights due diligence
in Germany and Norway: stepping, or striding, in the same direction? Business and
Human Rights Journal 6, 550–558.
Kraus, S., Breier, M., Lim, W.M., Dabić, M., Kumar, S., Kanbach, D., Mukherjee, D.,
Corvello, V., Piñeiro-Chousa, J., Liguori, E., Palacios-Marqués, D., Schiavone, F.,
Ferraris, A., Fernandes, C., Ferreira, J.J., 2022. Literature reviews as independent
studies: guidelines for academic practice. Review of managerial science 16,
2577–2595.
Kunz, N., Chesney, T., Gold, S., Kunz, N., Chesney, T., Trautrims, A., Gold, S., 2023.
Adoption and transferability of joint interventions to fight modern slavery in food
supply chains. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 258, 108809.
Lafargue, P., Rogerson, M., Allainguillaume, J., Lafargue, P., Rogerson, M., Parry, G.C.,
Allainguillaume, J., 2022. Broken chocolate: biomarkers as a method for delivering
cocoa supply chain visibility. Supply Chain Manag. 27, 728–741.
Lafarre, A., 2023. The proposed corporate sustainability due diligence directive:
corporate liability design for social harms. Eur. Bus. Law Rev. 34, 213–238.
Landau, I., Marshall, S., 2018. Should Australia be embracing the modern slavery model
of regulation? Fed. Law Rev. 46, 313–339.
Lebaron, G., 2014a. Reconceptualizing debt bondage: debt as a class-based form of labor
discipline. Crit. Sociol. 40, 763–780.
Lebaron, G., 2014b. Subcontracting is not illegal, but is it unethical? Business ethics,
forced labor, and economic success. Brown J. World Aff. 20, 237–249.
Lebaron, G., 2015. Unfree labour beyond binaries: insecurity, social hierarchy and labour
market restructuring. Int. Fem. J. Polit 17, 1–19.
Lebaron, G., 2021a. The role of supply chains in the global business of forced labour.
J. Supply Chain Manag. 57, 29–42.
Lebaron, G., 2021b. Wages: an overlooked dimension of business and human rights in
global supply chains. Business and Human Rights Journal 6, 1–20.
Lebaron, G., Ayers, A.J., 2013a. The rise of a ’new slavery’? Understanding african
unfree labour through neoliberalism. Third World Q. 34, 873–892.
Lebaron, G., Ayers, A.J., 2013b. The rise of a "new slavery’? Understanding african
unfree labour through neoliberalism. Third World Q. 34, 873–892.
Lebaron, G., Gore, E., 2020. Gender and forced labour: understanding the links in global
cocoa supply chains. J. Dev. Stud. 56, 1095–1117.
Lebaron, G., Ruhmkorf, A., 2017. Steering csr through home state regulation: a
comparison of the impact of the UK bribery act and modern slavery act on global
supply chain governance. Global Policy 8, 15–28.
Lebaron, G., Ruhmkorf, A., 2019. The domestic politics of corporate accountability
legislation: struggles over the 2015 UK modern slavery act. Soc. Econ. Rev. 17,
709–743.
Lee, J., 2010. Global Commodity Chains and Global Value Chains, 1 ed. Wiley-Blackwell.
Lusty, N., Richards, H., Lusty, N., Richards, H., 2022. Modern Slavery Legislation and the
Limits of Ethical Fashion. Cultural studies, pp. 1–26.
Ma, Y.J., Lee, H.H., Goerlitz, K., 2016. Transparency of global apparel supply chains:
quantitative analysis of corporate disclosures. Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Manag.
23, 308–318.
Mahdiraji, H.A., Hafeez, K., Jafarnejad, A., Rezayar, A., 2020. An analysis of the impact
of negative csr ‘forced labour’ parameter on the profitability of supply chain
contracts. J. Clean. Prod. 271.
Mai, N., Vourvachis, P., Grubnic, S., 2023. The impact of the UK’s modern slavery act
(2015) on the disclosure of ftse 100 companies. Br. Account. Rev. 55.
Mantouvalou, V., 2018. The UK modern slavery act 2015 three years on. Mod. Law Rev.
81, 1017–1045.
Marschke, M., Vandergeest, P., 2016. Slavery scandals: unpacking labour challenges and
policy responses within the off-shore fisheries sector. Mar. Pol. 68, 39–46.
Martin, J., 2018. Hiding in the light: the misuse of disclosure to advance the business and
human rights agenda. Columbia J. Transnat. Law 56, 530–592.
Martin-Ortega, O., 2017. Human rights risks in global supply chains: applying the UK
modern slavery act to the public sector. Global Policy 8, 512–521.
Mcgaughey, F., Voss, H., Cullen, H., Davis, M.C., 2022. Corporate responses to tackling
modern slavery: a comparative analysis of Australia, France and the United
Kingdom. Business and Human Rights Journal 7, 249–270.
Mcgrath, S., Mieres, F., Mcgrath, S., Mieres, F., 2022. The business of abolition:
marketizing ‘anti-slavery’. Dev. Change 53, 3–30.
Meehan, J., Pinnington, B.D., 2021. Modern slavery in supply chains: insights through
strategic ambiguity. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 41, 77–101.
Mehmood, W., Ahmad, A., Aman-Ullah, A., Mohd-Rashid, R., 2022. Modern slavery: a
literature review using bibliometric analysis and the nexus of governance. J. Publ.
23, 2.

Meho, L.I., Yang, K., 2007. Impact of data sources on citation counts and rankings of lis
faculty: Web of science versus scopus and google scholar. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci.
Technol. 58, 2105–2125.
Mehra, A., Shay, K., 2016. Corporate responsibility and accountability for modern forms
of slavery. J. Int. Crim. Justice 14, 453–468.
Mende, J., Drubel, J., 2020. At the junction: two models of business responsibility for
modern slavery. Hum. Right Rev. 21, 313–335.
Mileski, J.P., Galvao, C.B., Forester, Z.D., 2020. Human trafficking in the commercial
fishing industry: a multiple case study analysis. Mar. Pol. 116.
Min, S., Roath, A.S., Daugherty, P.J., Genchev, S.E., Chen, H., Arndt, A.D., Glenn
Richey, R., 2005. Supply chain collaboration: what’s happening? Int. J. Logist.
Manag. 16, 237–256.
Modern slavery act, 2015. Modern Slavery Act. England and Wales.
Modern slavery act, 2018. Modern Slavery Act (Australia).
Monciardini, D., Bernaz, N., Andhov, A., 2021. The organizational dynamics of
compliance with the UK modern slavery act in the food and tobacco sector. Bus. Soc.
60, 288–340.
Moussa, T., Allam, A., Elmarzouky, M., Moussa, T., Allam, A., Elmarzouky, M., 2022.
Global modern slavery and sustainable development goals: does institutional
environment quality matter? Bus. Strat. Environ. 31, 2230–2244.
Moussa, T., Allam, A., Elmarzouky, M., Moussa, T., Allam, A., Elmarzouky, M., 2023. An
Examination of uk Companies’ Modern Slavery Disclosure Practices: Does Board
Gender Diversity Matter? Business Strategy and the Environment.
Nakamura, K., Bishop, L., Ward, T., Pramod, G., Thomson, D.C., Tungpuchayakul, P.,
Srakaew, S., 2018. Seeing slavery in seafood supply chains. Sci. Adv. 4.
Natta, P.M., 2021. Anti-forced labour update: stronger legislation with an absence of
guidance. Glob. Trade Cust. J. 16, 209–216.
New, S.J., 2015. Modern slavery and the supply chain: the limits of corporate social
responsibility? Supply Chain Management-an International Journal 20, 697–707.
Nolan, J., 2022. Chasing the next shiny thing: can human rights due diligence effectively
address labour exploitation in global fashion supply chains? International journal for
crime, justice and social democracy 11, 1–14.
Nolan, J., Bott, G., 2018. Global supply chains and human rights: spotlight on forced
labour and modern slavery practices. Aust. J. Hum. Right 24, 44–69.
Nolan, J., Frishling, N., 2019. Australia’s modern slavery act: towards meaningful
compliance. Co. Securit Law J. 37, 104–126.
Novitz, T., Andrijasevic, R., 2020. Reform of the posting of workers regime – an
assessment of the practical impact on unfree labour relations. J. Common. Mark.
Stud. 58, 1325–1341.
Peake, K., Kenner, J., 2020. ’Slaves to fashion’ in Bangladesh and the eu: promoting
decent work? European Labour Law Journal 11, 175–198.
Pesterfield, C., Rogerson, M., 2023. Institutional logics in the UK construction industry’s
response to modern slavery risk: complementarity and conflict. J. Bus. Ethics 1–17.
Pinnington, B., Benstead, A., Meehan, J., 2023. Transparency in supply chains (tisc):
assessing and improving the quality of modern slavery statements. J. Bus. Ethics 182,
619–636.
Planitzer, J., 2016. Trafficking in human beings for the purpose of labour exploitation:
can obligatory reporting by corporations prevent trafficking? Neth. Q. Hum. Right.
34, 318–339.
Posthuma, A., Rossi, A., 2017. Coordinated governance in global value chains:
supranational dynamics and the role of the international labour organization. New
Polit. Econ. 22, 186–202.
Ras, I.A., Gregoriou, C., 2019. The quest to end modern slavery: metaphors in corporate
modern slavery statements. Anti-Trafficking Review 100–118.
Redmond, P., 2020. Regulating through reporting: an anticipatory assessment of the
australian modern slavery acts. Aust. J. Hum. Right 5–26.
Richards, H., 2022. Risk, reporting and responsibility: modern slavery, colonial power
and fashion’s transparency industry. International journal for crime, justice and
social democracy 11, 47–60.
Rogerson, M., Crane, A., Soundararajan, V., Grosvold, J., Cho, C.H., 2020. Organisational
responses to mandatory modern slavery disclosure legislation: a failure of
experimentalist governance? Account Audit. Account. J. 33, 1505–1534.
Rosile, G.A., Boje, D.M., Herder, R.A., Sanchez, M., 2021. The coalition of immokalee
workers uses ensemble storytelling processes to overcome enslavement in corporate
supply chains. Bus. Soc. 60, 376–414.
Russell, E., Lee, J., Clift, R., 2018. Can the sdgs provide a basis for supply chain decisions
in the construction sector? Sustainability 10, 629–648.
Sandler, S., Sonderman, K., Citron, I., Bhutta, M., Meara, J.G., 2018. Forced labor in
surgical and healthcare supply chains. J. Am. Coll. Surg. 227, 618–623.
Sarfaty, G.A., 2020. Translating modern slavery into management practice. Law and
Social Inquiry-Journal of the American Bar Foundation 45, 1027–1051.
Schaltegger, S., Lüdeke-Freund, F., Hansen, E.G., 2016. Business Models for
Sustainability: A Co-evolutionary Analysis of Sustainable Entrepreneurship,
Innovation, and Transformation, vol. 29. Organization & environment, pp. 264–289.
Schaper, S., Pollach, I., 2021. Modern slavery statements: from regulation to substantive
supply chain reporting. J. Clean. Prod. 313, 127872.
Schenner, J.K., 2017. The gangmaster licensing authority: an institution able to tackle
labour exploitation? Econ. Agro-Alimentare 19, 357–381.
Schenner, J.K., 2018. The governance of the horticultural supply chain in the United
Kingdom: a source of forced labour? Econ. Agro-Alimentare 20, 29–54.
Seuring, S., Gold, S., 2012. Conducting content-analysis based literature reviews in
supply chain management. Supply Chain Manag. 17, 544–555.
Seuring, S., Müller, M., 2008. From a literature review to a conceptual framework for
sustainable supply chain management. J. Clean. Prod. 16, 1699–1710.

19

V. Strand et al.

Journal of Cleaner Production 435 (2024) 140301
Trautrims, A., Gold, S., Touboulic, A., Emberson, C., Carter, H., 2020a. The UK
construction and facilities management sector’s response to the modern slavery act:
an intra-industry initiative against modern slavery. Business Strategy and
Development 4, 279–293.
Trautrims, A., Schleper, M.C., Cakir, M.S., Gold, S., 2020b. Survival at the expense of the
weakest? Managing modern slavery risks in supply chains during covid-19. J. Risk
Res. 23, 1067–1072.
Uddin, M.J., Azmat, F., Hossain, F., Uddin, M.J., Azmat, F., Fujimoto, Y., Hossain, F.,
2023. Exploitation in bangladeshi ready-made garments supply chain: a case of
irresponsible capitalism? Int. J. Logist. Manag. 34, 164–188.
UK Modern Slavery Act, 2015. Modern Slavery Act 2015 - GOV.UK. www.gov.uk.
Accessed 2 January 2024.
Van Buren, H.J., Schrempf-Stirling, J., Westermann-Behaylo, M., 2021. Business and
human trafficking: a social connection and political responsibility model. Bus. Soc.
60, 341–375.
Van Hoek, R., Sankararaman, V., Udesen, T., Geurts, T., Palumbo-Miele, D., 2020. Where
we are heading and the research that can help us get there – executive perspectives
on the anniversary of the journal of purchasing and supply management. J. Purch.
Supply Manag. 26, 100621.
Vijeyarasa, R., 2020. Women, work and global supply chains: the gender-blind nature of
Australia’s modern slavery regulatory regime. Aust. J. Hum. Right 74–92.
Voss, H., Davis, M., Sumner, M., Waite, L., Ras, A.I., Singhal, D., Jog, D., 2019.
International supply chains: compliance and engagement with the modern slavery
act. Journal of the British Academy 7, 61–76.
Walk Free Foundation, 2018. The Global Slavery Index 2018.
Walker, H., Schotanus, F., Bakker, E., Harland, C., 2013. Collaborative procurement: a
relational view of buyer-buyer relationships. Publ. Adm. Rev. 73, 588–598.
Walker, H., Chicksand, D., Radnor, Z., Watson, G., 2015. Theoretical perspectives in
operations management: an analysis of the literature. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 35,
1182–1206.
Wen, S.G., Zhao, J.C., 2020. The bumpy road of home states’ regulation of globalized
businesses-legal and institutional disruptions to supply chain disclosure under the
modern slavery act. Cathol. Univ. Law Rev. 69, 125–162.
Wilhelm, M., Kadfak, A., Bhakoo, V., Skattang, K., 2020. Private governance of human
and labor rights in seafood supply chains – the case of the modern slavery crisis in
Thailand. Mar. Pol. 115, 1–8.
Wray-Bliss, E., Michelson, G., 2021. Modern slavery and the discursive construction of a
propertied freedom: evidence from australian business. J. Bus. Ethics. 179, 649–663.
Yagci Sokat, K., Altay, N., 2023. Impact of modern slavery allegations on operating
performance. Supply Chain Manag. 28, 470–485.
Yawar, S.A., Kauppi, K., 2018. Understanding the adoption of socially responsible
supplier development practices using institutional theory: dairy supply chains in
India. J. Purch. Supply Manag. 24, 164–176.

Seuring, S., Yawar, S.A., Land, A., Khalid, R.U., Sauer, P.C., 2021. The application of
theory in literature reviews – illustrated with examples from supply chain
management. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 41, 1–20.
Shelley, L., Bain, C., 2015. Human trafficking: fighting the illicit economy with the
legitimate economy. Soc. Incl. 3, 140–144.
Siegmann, K.A., Sathi, S., Siegmann, K.A., Sathi, S., 2022. Unfreedoms in south India’s
tea value chain: reproduction and resistance. Globalizations 19, 971–988.
Simpson, D., Segrave, M., Quarshie, A., Kach, A., Handfield, R., Panas, G., Moore, H.,
2021. The role of psychological distance in organizational responses to modern
slavery risk in supply chains. J. Oper. Manag. 67, 989–1016.
Smith, K.T., Betts, T., 2015. Your company may unwittingly be conducting business with
human traffickers: how can you prevent this? Bus. Horiz. 58, 225–234.
Stank, T.P., Pellathy, D.A., In, J., Mollenkopf, D.A., Bell, J.E., 2017. New frontiers in
logistics research: theorizing at the middle range. J. Bus. Logist. 38, 6–17.
Stevenson, M., 2021. Hidden in plain sight: the bystander effect and the mobilisation of
modern slavery whistleblowing. Supply Chain Manag. 27, 1, 128-139.
Stevenson, M., Cole, R., 2018. Modern slavery in supply chains: a secondary data analysis
of detection, remediation and disclosure. Supply Chain Management-an
International Journal 23, 81–99.
Strand, V., Rinaldi-Semione, J., 2023. A Set of Briefings for the Development of a Welsh
Modern Slavery Research Agenda. University of Nottingham Rights Lab.
Stringer, C., Harré, T., 2019. Human trafficking as a fisheries crime? An application of
the concept to the New Zealand context. Mar. Pol. 105, 169–176.
Stringer, C., Michailova, S., 2018. Why modern slavery thrives in multinational
corporations’ global value chains. Multinatl. Bus. Rev. 26, 194–206.
Stringer, C., Hughes, S., Whittaker, D.H., Haworth, N., Simmons, G., 2016a. Labour
standards and regulation in global value chains: the case of the New Zealand fishing
industry. Environ. Plann. 48, 1910–1927.
Stringer, C., Whittaker, D.H., Simmons, G., 2016b. New Zealand’s turbulent waters: the
use of forced labour in the fishing industry. Global Network 16, 3–24.
Stringer, C., Kartikasari, A., Michailova, S., 2021. ‘They make a business out of desperate
people’: the role of recruitment agents in cross-border labour chains. Aust. J.
Manag., 31289622098689
Stringer, C., Burmester, B., Michailova, S., 2022a. Modern slavery and the governance of
labor exploitation in the Thai fishing industry. J. Clean. Prod. 371, 133645.
Stringer, T., Payne, A.R., Mortimer, G., 2022b. As cheap as humanly possible: why
consumers care less about worker welfare. J. Fash. Mark. Manag. 26, 717–737.
Szorenyi, A., 2016. Expelling slavery from the nation: representations of labour
exploitation in Australia’s supply chain. Anti-Trafficking Review 79–96.
Tang, L., Zhang, P., 2019. Global problems, local solutions: unfree labour relations and
seafarer employment with crewing agencies in China. Ind. Relat. J. 50, 277–291.
Tate, W.L., Ellram, L.M., Schoenherr, T., Petersen, K.J., 2014. Global competitive
conditions driving the manufacturing location decision. Bus. Horiz. 57, 381–390.

20

