Computer Law & Security Review 52 (2024) 105908

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Computer Law & Security Review: The International
Journal of Technology Law and Practice
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/clsr

ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT models for improving natural language processing
tasks in the Italian legal domain
Daniele Licari *, Giovanni Comandè
Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies, Piazza Martiri della Libertà, 33, Pisa, 56127, Italy

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Italian Legal NLP
Legal AI
Pre-trained Language Models
Italian Legal BERT

Legal-BERT models are based on the BERT architecture (or its variants) and have been developed specifically for
the legal domain. They have reached the state of the art in complex legal tasks such as legal research, document
synthesis, contract analysis, argument extraction, and legal prediction. In this paper, we proposed four versions
of Legal-BERT models pre-trained on the Italian legal domain. They aim to improve NLP applications in the
Italian legal context. We have shown that they outperforms the Italian "generalpurpose" BERT in several domainspecific tasks, such as named entity recognition, sentence classification, semantic similarity with Bi-encoders,
and document classification.

1. Introduction
In many domains, specialized models performed better than pretrained models on general domains [1–5]. In general, the more seman­
tically distant a domain-specific language is from the common language
than the greater the advantages of using specialized models, especially
for complex tasks.
In the Italian legal context, the discrepancy between the specific
language and the general language is even more pronounced. The Italian
legal language has its unavoidable complexity, like all technical lan­
guages, but it is made even more obscure by stylistic expedients that
often forcibly show a continuity with the languages of the past (Latin or
old Italian). Full understanding of legal texts is the exclusive prerogative
of experts in the field, who are able to grasp the meaning of these ex­
pressions. Carofiglio [6], a former Italian magistrate and politician,
compared legal jargon to a foreign language that one learns in college to
be admitted to a guild. A language capable of excluding the uninitiated
from courtrooms and judicial acts. It can be perceived by software as a
bizarre language that violates Italian grammar and syntax (character­
ized by imprecision, vagueness, opacity, stereotypes, archaisms,
redundant circumlocutions, formular phrases, abuse of subordinates). It
contains technical terms with specific and unambiguous meanings such
as “contumacia”, “anticresi”, “anatocismo”, and “sinallagma” (contu­
macy, antichresis, compound interest, reciprocity). It also makes
extensive use of terms that are in common use, but are often used with
their own and specific meanings, if not completely different from those
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: d.licari@santannapisa.it (D. Licari).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2023.105908
Available online 28 October 2023
2212-473X/© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

in common use. For example, “nullita`”, “annullabilita`”, “inefficacia”,
“inutilizzabilita`” (nullity, voidability, ineffectiveness,inadmissibility),
which outside of legal language are synonyms for annulment, refer to
entirely different and distinct concepts and situations. Such locutions as
“buon padre di famiglia” (good family man) and “possessore di buona
fede” (possessor of good faith) indicate different concepts from the
language of common use [7].
Traditional language models often struggle to overcome the limita­
tions posed by the linguistic complexity of legal text. Their training does
not adequately prepare them to understand and process the intricate
nature of legal language, including its grammar, syntax, and specialized
terminology. However, these limitations can be effectively addressed by
employing models that are specifically trained and fine-tuned to handle
legal text. By focusing on the unique characteristics and nuances of legal
language, these specialized models offer improved accuracy and profi­
ciency in comprehending and analyzing legal documents.
Chalkidis et al. [8] made significant contributions to the field of legal
natural language processing by developing the LEGAL-BERT framework,
which encompasses a family of transformer-based models tailored spe­
cifically for the English legal domain. Their research aimed to enhance
the performance of the general-purpose BERT-BASE model in various
prediction tasks by incorporating legal domain expertise. LEGAL-BERT
consists of multiple variants, each distinct in terms of its pre-training
methodology and the sources of training data. Chalkidis et al.
employed two primary methods of domain adaptation within the
LEGAL-BERT framework: 1. Additional Pre-training: In this approach, a

D. Licari and G. Comandè

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105908

BERT-BASE model underwent further pre-training on a diverse range of
legal text sources, such as EU legislation, UK legislation, US contracts,
and US cases. This additional pre-training equipped the model with
domain-specific knowledge, enabling it to understand and classify legal
documents more effectively. 2. From-Scratch Pre-training: Another
variant of LEGAL-BERT was pre-trained entirely from scratch using legal
documents as the sole training data source. This model, starting with no
prior knowledge from a general BERT model, learned directly from legal
text corpora, including court cases, statutes, and legal articles. These
variants of LEGALBERT were trained on diverse legal text sources,
allowing them to capture the nuanced linguistic patterns, terminologies,
and contextual cues unique to the legal domain. Chalkidis et al. con­
ducted a series of experiments to evaluate the performance of
LEGAL-BERT across various legal prediction tasks, such as legal docu­
ment classification, legal entity recognition, sentiment analysis in legal
texts, and legal question answering. The findings of their research
demonstrated that LEGAL-BERT consistently outperformed the
general-purpose BERT-BASE model across these tasks. The incorpora­
tion of domain-specific knowledge led to higher prediction accuracy,
improved comprehension of legal language, and enhanced contextual
representation for legal documents. The development of LEGAL-BERT
bears substantial practical implications for the legal profession. It pro­
vides a powerful tool for legal research, document analysis, and infor­
mation retrieval. Legal professionals can leverage LEGAL-BERT to
efficiently categorize and analyze legal documents, identify relevant
case law, extract legal concepts, and make more informed decisions.
Inspired by LEGAL-BERT, we present the development of
ITALIANLEGAL-BERT models, capable of understanding the semantic
meaning of Italian legal texts as never before.
In this paper, we make the following contributions:

trained NPL models. Some researchers have demonstrated that the use
of domain-specific pre-trained models can improve the performance of
downstream tasks in the legal domain. Chalkidis et al. [8] proposed the
LEGAL-BERT models pre-trained from scratch on 11.5 GB of legal texts
and its variant further pre-training BERT-base model on legal corpora.
Their experiments showed more substantial improvement in the most
challenging end-task (i.e., multilabel classification in ECHR-CASES and
contract header, lease details in CONTRACTS-NER), where in-domain
knowledge is more important. Furthermore, no significant differences
in performance were found between the two LEGAL-BERT variants.
Similar results are reported by Zheng et al. [10]. They also trained
LEGAL-BERT models both with additional pre-training from the BERT
base and with pre-training from scratch using a 37GB legal text collec­
tion. They compared their LEGAL-BERT and BERT-Base models on
several downstream NLP tasks with different levels of difficulty and
domain specificity. They suggest using domain-specific pre-trained
models for very difficult legal tasks. They outperformed BERT-Base on
complex downstream tasks such as identifying whether contract terms
are potentially unfair [11]. In contrast, additional domain pre-training
adds little value to simpler tasks compared to BERT-Base.
Recent works by Zhang et al. [12,13] on legal argument mining
confirm this trend. Domain-specific BERT variants have achieved strong
performance in many tasks. No significant differences were found be­
tween the two different methods of domain adaptation.
’Vanilla’ Transformer models, such as LEGAL-BERT, may have dif­
ficulty capturing long-range relationships between words, and their use
is limited to small portions of the text (typically 512 tokens) due to the
computational cost of the attention mechanism. Condevaux and Harispe
[14] proposed a new Local-Sparse-Global (LSG) attention mechanism to
handle long sequences. Local attention allows the model to focus on
specific parts of the input, sparse connections are used to extend the
local context by selecting an additional set of tokens according to a set of
rules (e.g. using norm, stride, pooling, LSH approach), while global
attention allows the model to consider the relationships between
different parts of the input. They demonstrated the superiority of the
LEGAL-BERT with LSG attention mechanism over the original
LEGAL-BERT model on three Multi-class classification legal tasks
[15–17].
The success in this area encouraged researchers to build pre-trained
language models on legal corpora in different languages [18]. Masala
et al. 2021 [19] published the jurBERT model pretrained on a large
Romanian legal corpus. It outperformed several strong baselines for
legal judgment prediction tasks. In the same year, Douka et al. [20]
created a language model adapted to French legal texts and showed that
their model outperformed its generalized counterparts in the French
legal domain. In China, researchers [21] have improved many predictive
tasks on long Chinese legal documents using a pretrained language
model on millions of documents published by the Chinese government.
In 2022, AL-Qurishi et al. presented AraLegal-BERT [22], a pretrained
language model for Arabic legal text, and showed that their model
achieved better accuracy than the general BERT over the Arabic legal
text. In Italy, A. Tagarelli and A. Simeri 2022 [23] proposed LamBERTa
models for retrieving law articles, developing a BERT further pre-trained
on the Italian Civil Code (ICC, few megabytes of data). Their model
outperformed the ``predecessors” of BERT text classification models
(BiLSTM, TextCNN, TextRCNN, Seq2Seq, Transformer) for prediction
tasks on ICC articles.
In the same year, we introduced the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT model
[24], which involved an extended pre-training process of the Italian
BERT-base model using Italian civil cases. This current paper expands
upon the initial ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT paper presented at the confer­
ence and encompasses several noteworthy contributions. Primarily, we
present the distillation of ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT’s knowledge into a
smaller and more efficient model that operates at three times the speed
while preserving its effectiveness. Additionally, we introduce a novel
model based on CamemBERT, which undergoes comprehensive

1. We publicly release1 on hunggingface hub [9] the ITALIAN-LEGAL
BERT models to support Italian legal NLP research; to the best of
our knowledge, they are the first language models pre-trained on a
large corpus of Italian legal cases.
2. We proposed two versions of the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT model
usingtwo different methods of domain adaptation: a model with
additional pre-training of the Italian BERT-base model on Italian
civil cases (ITALEGAL-BERT-FP) and its pre-trained variant from
scratch on Italian legal documents (ITA-LEGAL-BERT-SC) based on
the CamemBERT architecture.
3. We ’distilled’ the knowledge of ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT(-FP) on
smallermodel (only 4 transformation layers instead of 12) three
times faster than the teacher model. It is essential in all applications
that work with a large amount of data (e.g., search engines and
clustering on big data).
4. We created two variants of ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT to handle long­
sequences based on Local + Sparse + Global Attention. It provides
flexibility in how the model attends to the input sequence. Local and
sparse attention help address the computational complexity associ­
ated with attending to all positions, making it more feasible to pro­
cess long sequences. On the other hand, global attention ensures that
the model can capture global dependencies and consider the entire
context when necessary.
5. We show that ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT models outperform general­
izedequivalents in several downstream tasks, such as sequence
classification, document classification, semantic similarity, and
named entity recognition in the Italian legal domain.
2. Related work
The legal writing system is very different from generic texts, with
many domain-specific peculiarities. This discrepancy affects the pre1

on huggingface.co/dlicari
2

D. Licari and G. Comandè

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105908

dataset’s size, the computational resources available, and the need to
strike a balance between efficiency and model performance. This
approach enabled the achievement of a robust training process that
effectively captured the intricacies of the legal domain within the given
resource constraints.
During the training process, we utilized the BERT architecture with a
language modeling head on top and employed a dynamic masking
pattern[27] with WordPiece tokenization[28]. The adoption of a dy­
namic masking pattern, particularly in conjunction with WordPiece, can
provide several advantages. Unlike a fixed masking pattern, dynamic
masking randomly masks different tokens in each training instance. This
approach encourages the model to learn more robust and general rep­
resentations of the language, as it must predict the masked tokens based
on the surrounding context.
To optimize the training, we used the AdamW optimizer and set an
initial learning rate of 5e-5 with linear decay. The sequence length was
set to 512, ensuring that the model could effectively capture long-range
dependencies within the text. Due to GPU capacity constraints, we chose
a batch size of 10 for training. Over the course of training, we performed
8.4 million training steps. The training was conducted on a single GPU
V100 with 16GB of memory. For more detailed information regarding
the specific hyperparameters employed in the training process, please
refer to the appendix in Table A.10.
ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-SC. The ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-SC model
was trained from scratch using a larger training dataset consisting of
6.6GB of civil and criminal cases. To achieve this, we employed the
CamemBERT architecture [29] with a language modeling head on top.
During training, we utilized the AdamW optimizer with an initial
learning rate of 2e-5 and linear learning rate decay. The sequence length
was set to 512, and a batch size of 18 was used. To handle the compu­
tational demands of the training process, we leveraged the power of 8
NVIDIA A100 GPUs, each equipped with 40GB memory. By employing
distributed data parallelism, we were able to process 8 batches per
training step, significantly enhancing the training throughput. For more
detailed information regarding the specific hyperparameters used dur­
ing training, please refer to the appendix in Table A.11.
While ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-SC shares similarities with the previ­
ous model, there are notable differences. Instead of WordPiece tokeni­
zation, we opted for SentencePiece tokenization [30], which was trained
from scratch on a subset of the training set, consisting of 5 million
sentences. The vocabulary size was set to 32,000, ensuring a compre­
hensive coverage of the legal language. The sentencepiece tokenizer is a
widely adopted subword tokenization method known for effectively
handling out-of-vocabulary words, capturing morphological variations,
and reducing the overall vocabulary size. In the tokenization process,
the text is divided into a sequence of subword units, taking into account
both the boundaries of individual words and the subword units within
words. The main distinction between WordPiece and SentencePiece lies
in their vocabulary generation. WordPiece constructs its vocabulary by
considering the frequency of subwords in the training corpus. In
contrast, SentencePiece employs unsupervised training algorithms, such
as byte-pair encoding (BPE), for vocabulary generation. This algorithm
analyzes the text’s statistical properties and identify frequently occur­
ring subword units. Through the training process, the algorithm learns
patterns in the text and determines the optimal subword units to form a
vocabulary. This vocabulary comprises the identified subword units,
which are then treated as tokens during both model training and infer­
ence stages. By using subword units as tokens, the model can capture
fine-grained linguistic information and effectively represent complex
structures within the text. This integration enables the ITALIAN-LEGAL
BERT model to achieve a more comprehensive and accurate represen­
tation of the Italian legal language An advantageous aspect of utilizing
the CamemBERT implementation from the Huggingface transformers
library is its seamless integration of the sentencepiece tokenizer with the
ITALIAN-LEGAL BERT model.

pre-training from scratch on Italian legal documents. This new model
greatly enhances the available resources for understanding legal lan­
guage. To effectively handle long sequences, we introduce two variants
of ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT that incorporate a combination of local,
sparse, and global attention mechanisms. These variants address the
challenges associated with processing extended inputs and ensure
improved performance. Furthermore, we enhance the evaluation of
ITALIAN-LEGALBERT by expanding the dataset with additional data
and models. This comprehensive evaluation allows for a thorough
assessment of its capabilities across various downstream tasks. Addi­
tionally, we conduct comprehensive evaluations specifically focused on
document classification tasks, further exemplifying the versatility and
practicality of the proposed models. Overall, these contributions
significantly advance the capabilities and practicality of ITALIAN-LE
GAL-BERT, effectively establishing its effectiveness in processing legal
language tasks.
3. ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT models
In this section, we will delve into the implementation details of the
ITALIANLEGAL-BERT models. To differentiate between the two domain
adaptation approaches, we have labeled the model that underwent
further pretraining on the Italian legal domain starting from the Italian
BERT model as ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-FP, and the model pre-trained
from scratch as ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-SC.
Background. BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformers) [25] is a contextual word embedding model using the
transformers architecture [26] that can create context-sensitive
embedding for each word in a given sentence, which will then be used
for downstream tasks. BERT can be embedded in a downstream task and
is developed as a task specific integrated architecture.
The Italian XXL BERT model, hereafter referred to as Italian BERT, is
a cased model with 12 layers, 768 hidden units, 12 attention heads, and
110 million parameters. It follows the Bidirectional Encoder Represen­
tations from Transformers architecture and has been trained on a large
Italian corpus of 81 GB. The training data includes Italian Wikipedia,
texts from the OPUS corpora collection (opus.nlpl.eu), and data from the
Italian portion of the OSCAR corpus (oscar-corpus.com). The Italian XXL
BERT model is available on the Huggingface model hub[9] and was
trained by the MDZ Digital Library team at the Bavarian State Library.
ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-FP. This model was previously introduced in
our article [24] and it was created by continuing the training of Italian
BERT on the target domain using masked language modeling.
ITALIANLEGAL-BERT-FP is initialized with the Italian XXL BERT model
and further pre-trained for an additional 4 epochs on 3.7 GB of Italian
legal text sourced from the National Jurisprudential Archive.
The duration of the training phase was determined by carefully
evaluating the specific characteristics of the dataset and the computa­
tional resources available. Firstly, the size of the dataset played a crucial
role in the decision-making process. The dataset under consideration
was of substantial magnitude, providing an ample amount of data to
capture the necessary patterns and linguistic nuances inherent to the
legal domain. The dataset size increased the likelihood of the model
acquiring a comprehensive understanding of the complex language
structures and legal terminology with a limited number of epochs.
Additionally, the computational resources and time required for pretraining were taken into account. Training a largescale language
model like BERT can be computationally intensive and timeconsuming.
Given the constraints of the available resources, a careful balance
needed to be struck between maximizing model performance and effi­
ciently utilizing the resources at hand. Consequently, after careful
consideration, it was determined that conducting the training for four
epochs would be a practical and efficient decision. This choice ensured
that the available resources were utilized effectively while still allowing
the model to learn meaningful representations from the dataset. Overall,
the duration of the training phase was determined by considering the
3

D. Licari and G. Comandè

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105908

Training Datasets. To train ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-FP, we initially
used a dataset consisting of 235,000 documents specifically focused on
civil law cases. Subsequently, we expanded the dataset by incorporating
approximately 300,000 documents related to criminal law cases to train
ITALIANLEGAL-BERT-SC from scratch, encompassing both civil and
criminal contexts. It is important to note that the legal documents used
in this study were obtained through scientific collaboration agreements
with various Italian courts, making them unavailable for public
distribution.
The decision to adapt ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-FP solely to the civil
context was driven by the overarching objectives of the primary project,
predictivejustice.eu, which aims to enhance the efficiency of civil jus­
tice. As a result, the focus of this specific model was tailored to civil law
cases. Conversely, for the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-SC model, we chose to
include all available data, including criminal law cases. Training the
model from scratch poses a higher risk of overfitting, and incorporating
a diverse range of examples helps the model generalize better across
different legal contexts.
Preprocessing Datasets. To prepare the legal documents for
training, we employed various preprocessing steps. First, we utilized the
Tika framework [31] to convert the documents from their original
format to plain text. Subsequently, we applied several regular
expression-based cleaning functions to the law corpora, aiming to
consolidate whitespace and remove unnecessary line breaks. For sen­
tence segmentation, we customized the spaCy model for the Italian
language by incorporating new tokenization rules. These rules specif­
ically targeted abbreviations and acronyms commonly found in Italian
legal texts.2 By incorporating these exceptions, we enhanced the accu­
racy of sentence segmentation in legal documents. The segmented sen­
tences underwent further cleaning, where we removed special
characters and filtered out sentences that were too short (less than five
words), ensuring the quality and relevance of the training data. We
implemented a filtering process to remove sentences with less than five
words. This decision was based on the understanding that very short
sentences lack sufficient context and may not contribute meaningful
information for training a language model. By excluding such sentences,
we aimed to enhance the overall quality and coherence of the training
data.
The performance of language models is often improved when trained
on sentences of a certain minimum length. Longer sentences provide
more contextual information and exhibit a greater syntactic structure,
enabling the model to capture more intricate linguistic patterns and
dependencies. On the other hand, very short sentences, particularly
those consisting of just a few words, are more likely to be noisy or
incomplete fragments of text. Consequently, by filtering out these sen­
tences, we effectively reduced noise within the training data, thereby
enhancing the overall signal-to-noise ratio.
The preprocessed dataset used for training the ITALIAN-LEGALBERTFP model consisted of 21,004,500 sentences and 498,002,402
words, amounting to 3.7 GB of data. In contrast, the final corpus
employed for ITALIANLEGAL-BERT-SC encompassed 33,276,194 sen­
tences and 855,452,531 words, totaling 6.6 GB.
Finally, to prepare the input data for the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-FP
model, we applied the Italian BERT tokenizer to tokenize the senten­
ces from the corpus. The sentences were truncated to a maximum length
of 512 tokens. Conversely, for ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-SC, we utilized
our pretrained SentencePiece tokenization specifically trained on a
subset of Italian legal documents.
MLM Evaluation. Perplexity (PPL) is a commonly used metric for
evaluating language models. In the context of the Masked Language
Modeling (MLM) objective, perplexity is computed by making pre­
dictions for the masked tokens in separate evaluation datasets, while

having access to the remaining tokens. In our evaluation, we utilized two
distinct datasets: one consisting of 20,000 civil cases and another con­
taining 20,000 criminal cases. These datasets were excluded from the
training process and underwent the same pre-processing procedure as
the training set. The evaluation corpus for civil cases comprised 592,426
sentences and 35,378,854 words, while the corpus for criminal cases
comprised 506,831 sentences and 18,941,252 words. To calculate per­
plexity, a portion of the tokens in the evaluation datasets were replaced
with special mask tokens. Specifically, these mask tokens accounted for
15% of the total tokens in the evaluation datasets. The language model
was then tasked with predicting the original tokens that were masked
based on the surrounding context. By comparing the predicted tokens
with the original tokens, we computed the cross-entropy loss for the
masked tokens. This loss quantifies how well the language model can
estimate the probability distribution of the masked tokens given the
context. Formally, the perplexity (denoted as PPL) of an MLM model on
a set of masked tokens in a text corpus is defined as:
)
(
n=1
1 ∑
log(P(wi |context))
PPL(D) = exp −
N n
In this formula:
• D represents the dataset containing examples with masked tokens
that the model is evaluated on.
• N is the total number of masked tokens in the dataset.
• P(wi|context))) is the probability assigned by the MLM model to the
correct word wi given the context (the surrounding words) in which
wi appears.
It’s important to emphasize that the evaluation datasets used for
computing perplexity were separate from the training data. These
datasets serve as a measure of the language model’s generalization
ability to unseen examples. By evaluating the model’s accuracy in pre­
dicting the masked tokens, we gain insights into its effectiveness in
capturing underlying language patterns and generating coherent and
contextually appropriate text.
The findings presented in Table 1 highlight some interesting obser­
vations regarding the performance of the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT models
compared to the general BERT model. Specifically, the ITALIAN-LEGALBERT-FP model demonstrates a notable reduction in evaluation per­
plexity when applied to civil cases, indicating an improvement in its
language modeling capabilities within the civil law domain. However, in
the context of criminal cases, the general BERT model outperforms both
the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERTFP and ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-SC models. It
is worth noting that the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-SC model shows a slight
improvement in perplexity compared to the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-FP
model for criminal cases, albeit not reaching the performance level of
the general BERT model.
To delve deeper into the analysis, a qualitative investigation was
conducted by seeking input from civil law judges. They were presented
with domain-specific sentences, and the models were tasked with pre­
dicting the masked words within the legal context. Unlike the previous
random masking approach, the masking was done strategically based on
the legal context to focus on significant words. The results presented in
Table 2 demonstrate the models’ ability to infer the masked words, with
Table 1
Perplexity scores on evaluation datasets.

2

The complete list can be accessed at https://huggingface.co/dlicari/Italia
n-LegalBERT/blob/main/abbreviazioni.csv
4

Dataset

#Sentences

Model

PPT

Civil cases

592,426

Criminal cases

506,831

ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-FP
ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-SC
Italian BERT
ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-FP
ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-SC
Italian BERT

3.4580
6.1472
4.5430
4.9520
4.7733
4.3137

D. Licari and G. Comandè

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105908

Table 2
Results of the Italian BERT and ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT mask filling pipeline on the prediction of a single mask (strikethrough words). The probability of a specific token
is reported in parentheses.
Sentence (Mask is strikethrough)

ITA BERT

ITA-LEGAL-BERTFP

ITA-LEGAL-BERTSC

Il padre pu`o vedere il figlio a weekend alternati
en: The faather can see his son on alternate
weekends
viene stabilita una collocazione paritetica dei
figli
en: an equal placement of the children is
established.
assegno di mantenimento comprensivo di spese
straordinarie en: maintenance allowance
including extraordinary expenses.
viene stabilito il mantenimento diretto
en: direct maintenance is established

genitore (53.61%) padre (27.70%)
pap`a (6.81%) marito (2.19%)
proprietario (0.62%)
garantita (24.1%) meno (10.72%)
proposta (6.66%) stabilita
(4.52%) assicurata (4.09%)

padre (99.24%) genitore (0.56%)
ricorrente (0.05%) resistente (0.03%) pap`a
(0.03%)
prevista (40.48%) stabilita (21.81%)
disposta (12.74%) assicurata (6.32%)
garantita (1.77%)

padre (97.37%) genitore (1.71%)
ricorrente (0.35%) coniuge (0.10%)
resistente (0.07%)
stabilita (31.69%) prevista (14.73%)
disposta (13.80%) fissata (4.35%)
prospettata (2.26%)

. (38.58%) mediche (17.01%);
(6.62%) legali(4.55%) generali
(3.35%)
trattamento (8.58%) prezzo
(7.43%) contratto (5.08%)
contributo (4.23%) lavoro (4.06%)
pelle (19.12%) capelli (16.54%)
sesso (8.53%) colore (6.17%) peso
(4.48%)

straordinarie (69.25%)
: (7.61%) extra (4.86%) mediche (4.30%)
. (4.20%)
pagamento (48.93%) versamento (23.89%)
mantenimento (5.20%) trasferimento
(2.54%) rimborso (2.09%)
sesso (89.01%) genere (5.40%) nome
(1.20%) profilo (1.01%) persona (0.43%)

mediche (24.51%) . (20.28%) extra
(14.73%) straordinarie (12.48%
: (8.13%)
pagamento (11.67%) compenso (9.41%)
rapporto (5.71%) mantenimento (3.52%)
collegamento (3.19%)
destinazione (10.51%) sesso (8.89%)
diagnosi (7.22%) genere (3.93%)
denominazione (3.81%)

Comune (11.89%) giudice (9.17%)
cittadino (4.70%) lavoratore
(3.17%) sindaco (2.62%)

ricorrente (72.64%) convenuto (9.64%)
resistente (3.99%) lavoratore (2.90%)
Ministero (2.53%)

ricorrente (65.29%) convenuto (3.80%)
richiedente (3.60%) Condominio (2.39%)
lavoratore (2.09%)

Comune (11.89%)
giudice (9.17%)
cittadino (4.70%)
lavoratore (3.17%)
sindaco (2.62%)

Corte (56.29%)
corte (23.26%)
sentenza (12.49%)
giurisprudenza (3.87%)
decisione (1.64%)

Corte (88.25%)
corte (10.91%)
sentenza (0.66%)
decisione (0.06%)
pronuncia (0.02%

cambiamento di sesso senza operazione
chirurgica
en:sex change without
surgery
Il ricorrente ha chiesto revocarsi l’obbligo di
pagamento.
en: The plaintiff requested that the payment
obligation be revoked.
Non avendo la Corte di merito valutato la prova
en: Not having the Court of merit
assessed the eviden

the correct word consistently appearing among the top suggestions
generated by both the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-FP and ITALIAN-LEGALBERT-SC models.
However, it is important to recognize that improvements in intrinsic
perplexity do not necessarily guarantee improvements in extrinsic per­
formance for specific language processing tasks. The ability to accu­
rately recognize the context of entire sentences or identify domainspecific terms may be more critical in certain tasks than the recogni­
tion of high-frequency tokens considered in perplexity computation
using random masking, such as stopwords. To gain a comprehensive
understanding of the performance of the ITALIAN-LEGALBERT models,
we will conduct a series of experiments on downstream tasks in the
forthcoming ``Downstream Evaluation Task” section. These experiments
will assess the models’ performance in specific language processing
applications, providing a more comprehensive analysis of their relative
and absolute performance behaviors compared to the general BERT
model.
By evaluating the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT models’ performance in
downstream tasks, we aim to determine their practical utility in realworld scenarios and shed light on their strengths and weaknesses. This
comprehensive evaluation will enable us to gain a deeper understanding
of how well these models capture the underlying language patterns and
generate coherent and contextually appropriate text within the legal
domain.

efficiency is crucial. By distilling the knowledge from a larger teacher
model into a smaller student model, we can obtain a model that is more
efficient, faster in inference, and requires fewer computational re­
sources. This makes it feasible to deploy the model on devices with
limited memory and processing power, opening up possibilities for realtime applications and scenarios where quick responses are essential.
In the context of the Italian legal language, knowledge distillation
can bring several key advantages. Firstly, the legal domain often deals
with large volumes of complex text, making the use of computationally
demanding models challenging in practice. By employing knowledge
distillation, we can develop student models that are specifically tailored
to the Italian legal language and its unique characteristics, while still
benefiting from the expertise of larger and more comprehensive teacher
models.
So, We used the process of knowledge distillation to create a fast,
lightweight student model with only four levels of Transformers,
capable of producing sentence embeddings similar to those produced by
the more complex ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-FP teacher model. The student
model, DISTILITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT, was initialized with four layers of
Transformer taken from the teacher model and optimized using
Sentence-BERT [32] library by minimizing the mean square error (MSE)
between its embeddings and those produced by the teacher model.
It was trained on the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-FP train set (3.7 GB) for
4 epochs using the AdamW optimizer, initial learning rate 1e-4 (with
linear decay), batch size 24, warm-up steps 1000, evaluation step 5000,
and automatic mixed precision (AMP) (details in the appendix tab A.12).
Once the distillation process was completed, the student model was able
to produce embeddings similar to those produced by the teacher model
but much faster. In our experiments presented in the ‘Downstream
evaluation task ‘section, we found that the DISTIL-ITALIAN-LEGALBERT with 4 Transformer layers was able to maintain a similar perfor­
mance to the teacher model while being 3 times faster.

3.1. DISTIL-ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT
”Knowledge distillation” is a technique in which a large, complex
model (known as the ``teacher model”) is used to train a smaller, more
streamlined model (known as the ``student model”). The goal of
knowledge distillation is to transfer the knowledge and expertise of the
teacher model to the student model, allowing the student model to
achieve similar performance while being more efficient in terms of
computational resources and memory requirements.
The motivation behind knowledge distillation lies in the desire to
create models that are more lightweight and suitable for deployment on
resourceconstrained devices or in situations where computational

3.2. LSG-ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT
The inclusion of the Local-Sparse-Global (LSG) attention mechanism
in the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT models addresses the challenge of
5

D. Licari and G. Comandè

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105908

4.1. Named entity recognition

effectively processing long texts. By integrating local and sparse atten­
tion, these models are capable of efficiently handling extensive legal
documents while maintaining reasonable computational efficiency. This
enhancement extends the applicability of ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT to tasks
that involve lengthy legal texts, such as document classification, sum­
marization, and information extraction.
The key advantage of the LSG attention mechanism lies in its ability
to capture both global dependencies and local context within long se­
quences. By incorporating global tokens and leveraging sparsity factors,
the models can attend to relevant information throughout the entire
document while simultaneously processing local neighborhoods effi­
ciently. This combination of global and local attention empowers the
models to capture crucial legal language patterns, dependencies, and
semantic relationships across different sections of the text, thus
improving their understanding and performance on legal text-related
tasks.
Additionally, the LSG attention mechanism provides an effective
solution for reducing computational complexity when dealing with long
sequences. By employing sparsity patterns and selecting tokens based on
norms, attention computations can focus on the most informative seg­
ments of the sequence, reducing overall computational requirements
without sacrificing performance. This feature is particularly advanta­
geous in resource-constrained environments or scenarios that necessi­
tate real-time processing of lengthy legal documents.
To implement the LSG attention mechanism, we utilized the LSG
converter script, available at https://github.com/ccdv-ai/convert
checkpoint to lsg, which replaced the full attention mechanism in the
encoder section of the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-FP and ITALIAN-LEGALBERT-SC models. The
LSG attention configuration involved a maximum sequence length of
16,384, 7 global tokens, 128 local block size, 128 sparse block size, 2
sparsity factors, and a ’norm’ sparse selection pattern that selected the
tokens with the highest norms. These settings were carefully selected to
strike a balance between capturing long-range dependencies, preserving
local context, and achieving computational efficiency.
To evaluate the performance of the LSG variants, we conducted ex­
periments specifically on the legal document classification task. The
results demonstrated exceptional performance compared to the versions
with the full attention mechanism constrained to 512 tokens. For more
detailed insights and findings from these experiments, please refer to the
Legal Document Classification section of this study.
In conclusion, the integration of the LSG attention mechanism into
the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT models offers significant advantages for
effectively handling long legal texts. The LSG variants exhibit excellent
performance in legal document classification, surpassing the versions
with full attention restricted to 512 tokens. By incorporating local and
sparse attention, these models can efficiently process extensive legal
documents, capture global dependencies, and preserve local context.
Moreover, the LSG attention mechanism enhances computational effi­
ciency, making it a valuable enhancement for deploying ITALIANLEGAL-BERT models in real-world applications that involve lengthy
legal texts.

We trained and evaluated the Italian-BERT and ITALIAN-LEGALBERT models on a Named Entity Recognition (NER) task to identify
named entities based on the type of person found in the judgments. We
defined 7 entity types, as shown in Table 3.
Dataset. We selected 118 judgments from the civil law database of
the Court of Genoa, with which we have a scientific collaboration
agreement. Given the considerable experience of our research group in
these matters, the selected judgments were all personal injury judgments
(no. 59) contained in the database, and an equal number of family
judgments were selected stratified by text length. We then converted the
PDF files to plain text using Tika [31], applied some text cleaning
functions (removal of multiple blank lines and extra spaces), and con­
verted the texts to an annotable data structure (jsonl format) for import
into the Doccano annotation tool [34]. We set up and used the Doccano
tool for quick and easy manual annotation of texts with the 7 predefined
entities. The experts found and annotated 6355 entities; Table 3 shows
the distribution of entities in the dataset. Finally, the dataset was divided
into 80% for model training (10% of the training set for validation) and
20% for model evaluation in a stratified manner to preserve the distri­
bution of entities in the two subsets.
Model architecture. We created our NER models using spaCy’s v3.2
Named Entity Recognition system [33]. The model architecture in Fig. 1
consists of a two-tier pipeline: the contextual embedding layer and the
transition-based chunking model [35]. The first tier of our NER models
is the contextual embedding layer, responsible for encoding tokens into
continuous vectors based on their context. This layer utilizes pre-trained
language models, such as Italian BERT or ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT, to
capture the semantic meaning and representation of tokens within their
surrounding context. The contextual embeddings provide rich contex­
tual information that helps in understanding the nuanced characteristics
of named entities. The second tier of our NER models is the
transition-based chunking model. This model predicts the structure of
the text by mapping it onto a set of state transitions. It uses the
contextual word embeddings obtained from the previous layer to
incrementally construct states from the input sequence. These states
represent different parts of the text and are assigned entity labels using a
multilayer neural network.
Training procedure. We trained four named entity recognition
pipelines,
Italian BERT + spaCy’s NER and ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT variants+
spaCy’s NER, using AdamW Optimizer, initial learning rate 5e-5 (with
linearly decay), 20,000 maximum number of steps, 250 warm-up steps,
early stopping patience on the F1 validation score, and batch size 128
(see Table A.13 in the Appendix for more details).
Evaluation. We compared the four NER pipelines using the exact
match criterion with gold-standard entities (both entity boundary and
type are correct) in the test set. F-score is used to evaluate and compare
the performance. The results in Table 4 show that the NER pipeline with
Table 3
Entity type description and their distribution on train and test set.

4. Downstream evaluation tasks
The Italian BERT and ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT models were evaluated
and compared on four domain-specific downstream tasks. In the first
task, we trained the models with an additional sequence tagging layer on
the top using spaCy[33] to recognize name/role of actors involved in the
trial. For the second task, we fine-tuned the models with a sequence
classification head for the sentence type classification. In the third
downstream task, we tested the models on textual semantic similarity
using sentence embeddings (mean pooling on the last layer of the
models) and cosine similarity. In the last task, we tested them on the task
of classifying legal documents based on their content and also evaluated
LSG variants of the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT models.

Entity

Description

#Train

#Test

Person

Names of the main actors
(plaintiffs and defendant)
Names of the judges
Names of the lawyers
Names of the witness
Names of the experts (e.g., doctors,
engineers)
Name of the family members of the
plaintiffs and defendants
Names of the children of the plaintiffs and
defendants

3103

771

328
334
201
136

80
74
57
24

637

162

353

95

Person-Judge
Person-Lawyer
Person-Witness
Person-Expert
Person-Family
Person-FamilyChildren

6

D. Licari and G. Comandè

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105908

Fig. 1. spaCy-transformer’s neural architecture for NER.

ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-FP contextual encoder and its distilled
version outperforms that with Italian BERT in recognizing most entities.
In our experiment, we found that a distilled model is able to maintain
approximately 98.9% of the performance of the teacher model while
being 2.7 times faster.
Notably, ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-SC is trained from scratch on the
Italian legal domain. While this allows the model to be highly focused on
the legal domain, it may not benefit as much from the general knowl­
edge acquired by models pre-trained on a broader range of text. As a
result, ITALIANLEGAL-BERT-SC may not perform as well on tasks that
require a broader understanding of language or rely on general knowl­
edge. The distilled model, DISTIL-ITA-LEGAL-BERT, offers a good
compromise between performance and speed of inference and training.
It is a compact version of the original model and is more efficient in
terms of memory usage and computation time. The distilled model can
be particularly useful in scenarios with limited computational resources
or when processing large amounts of data. It maintains a reasonable
level of performance while providing faster training and inference times
compared to the full-sized models. In cases where the task is relatively
simple and closer to general knowledge rather than highly complex
legal-specific knowledge, using the distilled model or even a
ITALIANLEGAL-BERT-FP may be more suitable.

This is because the task may not require the highly specialized
domain knowledge and fine-grained understanding of legal language
that the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-SC models offer. Therefore, the choice of
the best model depends on the complexity of the task, the availability of
domain-specific knowledge, and the trade-off between performance and
computational efficiency.
4.2. Sentence classification
Unlike the English legal context, there are no public datasets on
which to test models on downstream NLP tasks in the legal context.
Then, we created a new benchmark dataset for sentence classification
tasks. A common civil judgment has 5 basic parts:
1. INTRODUCTION: an indication of the judge who pronounced it;
anindication of the parties and their lawyers;
2. CONCLUSION OF THE PARTIES: the conclusions of the prosecutor (if
any) and those of the parties;
3. DEVELOPMENT OF THE TRIAL: summary of the appealed judgment
and reasons of appeal;
4. REASON: the concise statement of the factual and legal reasons
forthe decision (the statement of reasons);

Table 4
F-score (F1) for The ITALIAN LEGAL BERT variants+Spacy NER and ITALIAN BERT+Spacy NER models evaluated using exact match criterion on individual entities, f1
macro-average, and pipelines speed in processed words per second on the test set (higher is better).

Person-Judge
Person
Person-Lawyer
Person-Family-Children
Person-Witness
Person-Expert
Person-Family
AVG
SPEED

ITA-BERT

ITA-LEGALBERT-FP

ITA-LEGALBERT-SC

DISTIL-ITALEGAL-BERT

98.14
82.45
88.00
50.63
65.91
69.23
10.75
66.45
1911

98.77
83.30
91.50
59.38
66.00
67.69
8.47
67.87
1856

96.30
79.29
91.28
38.55
80.00
62.75
8.08
65.18
2652

98.14
82.01
83.66
47.40
70.48
70.00
18.35
67.15
4981

7

D. Licari and G. Comandè

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105908

5. CONCLUSION: the decisional content of the judgment.

Table 6
MCC and speed for sentence classification task on the test set using Italian BERT
and ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT variants with different classifiers on top (Linear,
MLP, LSTM, CNN).

We want to evaluate the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT models on a sentence
classification task by trying to predict the belonging section. Although
this downstream task was created to benchmark it could have practical
utility because Italian judgments do not follow a precise standard, often
sections are merged or are identified in a variety of headers that making
it difficult to apply rules based on regular expressions.
Dataset. We extracted 152,368 sentences from documents with 5
sections (using regular expression) from 1503 Italian Civil cases strati­
fied on section length, Table 5.
Finally, the dataset was split 80% for training models and 20% for
model evaluation (10% for validation and 10% for testing) in a stratified
fashion on the section name to preserve the distribution of sentences
across both subsets. The data were obtained through scientific collabo­
ration agreements between some Italian courts and the Scuola Superiore
Sant’Anna.
Classification Models. We trained Italian BERT and ITALIANLEGALBERT models with different sequence classification heads on
top of the BERT output:

11,737
18,684
32,174
78,701
11,072
152,368

Train samples/s

ITA-BERT

Linear
MLP
LSTM
CNN
Linear
MLP
LSTM
CNN
Linear
MLP
LSTM
CNN
Linear
MLP
LSTM
CNN

0.809
0.806
0.804
0.809
0.813
0.813
0.812
0.814
0.812
0.815
0.808
0.813
0.809
0.811
0.808
0.811

93.67
93.52
78.88
88.02
93.74
93.64
79.08
88.11
95.77
95.75
80.75
89.91
261.28
261.34
178.60
221.52

DISTIL-ITA-LEGAL-BERT

The Table 6 presents the results of the MCC (Matthews Correlation
Coefficient) and speed for a sentence classification task on the test set
using different classifiers on top of Italian BERT and ITALIAN-LEGALBERT variants (FP and SC). The MCC score reflects the performance of
the models, with higher values indicating better performance.
For Italian BERT, all the classifiers show comparable performance,
with MCC scores ranging from 0.804 to 0.809. The Linear and CNN
classifiers achieve the highest MCC scores of 0.809, while the MLP and
LSTM classifiers achieve slightly lower scores of 0.806 and 0.804,
respectively. In terms of speed, the LSTM classifier exhibits the slowest
processing time, with 78.88 train samples per second, while the Linear
and CNN classifiers demonstrate relatively faster speeds of 93.67 and
88.02 train samples per second, respectively.
When considering ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-FP, we observe the MCC
scores range is from 0.812 to 0.814, with the MLP classifier achieving
the highest score of 0.813. The Linear classifier also performs well, with
a score of 0.813. In terms of speed, the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-FP models
demonstrate similar performance to Italian BERT.
Moving on to ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-SC, we observe a slight
improvement in performance compared to the other variants. The MCC
scores range from 0.808 to 0.815, with the MLP classifier achieving the
highest score of 0.815. The Linear and CNN classifiers also demonstrate
strong performance, with scores of 0.812 and 0.813, respectively. In
terms of speed, ITALIANLEGAL-BERT-SC models exhibit similar pro­
cessing times compared to the other previous variants, with the MLP and
Linear classifiers achieving the highest speeds of 95.75 and 95.77 train
samples per second, respectively.
Finally, the DISTIL-ITA-LEGAL-BERT variant shows comparable
performance to ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-FP, with MCC scores ranging
from
0.808 to 0.811. The MLP and CNN classifiers achieve the highest
scores of 0.811. In terms of speed, the DISTIL-ITA-LEGAL-BERT models
exhibit faster processing times compared to the other variants, with the
MLP classifier being the fastest at 261.34 train samples per second.
In summary, the results indicate that ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT vari­
ants, particularly ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-SC, offer improved perfor­
mance compared to Italian BERT in terms of MCC scores. The choice of
classifier on top of the models also influences performance, with the
MLP classifier generally has a good trade-off between higher MCC scores
and speed among the different variants. Noteworthy are the results of
the distilled model, which outperforms the Italian Bert and is 3 times
faster.

Table 5
Distribution of sentences over the 5 sections.
N. SENTENCES

MCC

ITA-LEGAL-BERT-SC

Training procedure. We trained Italian BERT and ITALIANLEGALBERT models with different sequence classification heads on
top (Linear, MLP, LSTM, and CNN layer) using the same hyper­
parameters configuration (Table A.14 in the Appendix) for a fair com­
parison between models and architectures.
Evaluation. The performance of the models was evaluated by Mat­
thews Correlation Coefficient (MCC) scores in the test using the com­
bination of four encoders and four classifiers. MCC is a metric commonly
used to evaluate the performance of classification models in multi-class
classification tasks. It extends the use of MCC from binary classification
to handle multiple classes. In multi-class classification, MCC measures
the quality of the overall classification, taking into account true posi­
tives, true negatives, false positives, and false negatives for each class. It
provides a balanced measure that considers the performance across all
classes and provides an aggregate score that reflects the model’s ability
to classify instances correctly across multiple categories.

INTRODUCTION
CONCLUSION OF THE PARTIES
DEVELOPMENT OF THE TRIAL
REASON
CONCLUSION
TOTAL

Classifier

ITA-LEGAL-BERT-FP

• BERT±Linear, it adds a Dropout layer on BERT pooled output with a
Dropout rate 0.1 and an output Linear layer (BERT+Linear). Finally,
the cross-entropy loss weighted class distribution of the training set is
computed between the output of the last layer and target labels. The
class weights are estimated from the class weight function of Sklearn
[36] for unbalanced datasets.
• BERT±MLP, it adds two fully connected layers (FC) followed by
REctify Linear Unit (RELU), a Normalization layer, an output Linear
layer, and weighted cross-entropy loss.
• BERT±CNN, it adds three 1D convolution layers (Conv1d) incre­
mental kernel sizes (3,4,5). Each layer is followed by RELU. A
maximum global pooling layer is applied to the last convolution
layer, followed by a Dropout layer (rate 0.1), an output Linear layer,
and weighted cross-entropy loss.
• BERT±LSTM, it adds a bidirectional Long short-term memory
(LSTM) layer on BERT sequence output, a Dropout layer with rate
0.1, an output Linear layer, and weighted cross-entropy loss.

SECTION NAME

Encoder

8

D. Licari and G. Comandè

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105908

4.3. Semantic similarity with bi-encoders

Table 7
Thresholds, F-score (F1), and sentence encoding time of text similarity classifi­
cation task using ITALIAN BERT and ITALIAN LEGAL BERT variants as biencoder.

We tested the ability of the model on the task of determining whether
two pieces of legal text are similar, in terms of meaning. The strong
assumption is that two contiguous sentences within a specific section are
semantically related and refer to the same context, instead, two sen­
tences taken randomly from two different documents and different
sections can refer to a different context.
Dataset. We built the dataset by taking, from 1503 civil law judg­
ments, pairs of contiguous portions of the text (of 5 sentences) in the
"CONCLUSION OF PARTIES" and "DEVELOPMENT OF PROCESS" sec­
tions and text pairs from two different documents and sections. We
labeled as ‘similar’ the contiguous pairs from the same document and
‘unsimilar’ the pairs from different documents. The final dataset con­
tains 4018 text pairs (2009 labeled as ‘similar’ and the other 2009 as
‘unsimilar’). The choice of taking similar sentences from the two sec­
tions was made on the basis that the "CONCLUSION OF THE PARTIES"
and "DEVELOPMENT OF THE PROCESS" sections are more descriptive
and with self-contained concepts than other sections such as "REASON"
or "CONCLUSION" that contain many references to the previous sec­
tions. The initial assumption on the similarity has been validated by
experts on a subset of the dataset.
Similarity Procedure. The semantic similarity between the text
pairs in the dataset was evaluated using the Italian BERT and ITALIANLEGALBERT models to obtain the context vectors of the two sentences to
be compared (using mean pooling on the last layer) and, then, the cosine
similarity for the similarity scores between the pair of vectors (cos(x,y) =
xy
‖x|⋅‖y‖). For each model, a similarity threshold was established to identify

Encoder

Threshold

F1

Time (secs)

ITA-BERT
ITA-LEGAL-BERT-FP
ITA-LEGAL-BERT-SC
DISTIL-ITA-LEGAL-BERT

0.835
0.969
0.752
0.968

0.7509
0.7651
0.8230
0.7868

96.42
96.26
94.73
18.52

’similar’, and conversely, a value that is too high could lead to classi­
fying all pairs of sentences as ’unsimilar’. The choice of a correct simi­
larity threshold depends on the data under consideration and the
specific vector space of a model. Therefore, we optimized its value
independently on all models by selecting the best value that maximizes
the F1-score on the dataset. The values tested are in the range of 0 to 1
with step 0.001. The best thresholds for the four models are reported in
Table 7.
4.4. Legal document classification
Legal Document Classification is a crucial task in the legal domain
that involves assigning specific labels or categories to legal documents
based on their content, purpose, or characteristics. This classification
process enables efficient organization, retrieval, and analysis of legal
documents, facilitating legal research and decision-making. It encom­
passes identifying the subject matter, type, jurisdiction, or outcome of a
legal document.
In this particular context, we are evaluating the performance of
ITALIANLEGAL-BERT models on a challenging long text classification
task. The objective is to accurately identify the precise legal topic
addressed in the document, considering that the documents in question
exceed the token limit of 512, which is the capacity of the standard BERT
model. To overcome this limitation, we employ the LSG (Local-SparseGlobal) versions of the models, which are specifically designed to handle
long texts efficiently.

similar and non-similar texts. The Fig. 2 shows the similarity scores
distribution over the groups of ‘similar’ and ‘unsimilar’ pairs of sen­
tences, calculated using the Italian BERT and ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT
models as contextual sentence encoders.
Optimized threshold. A similarity threshold is a numerical value
that is applied to the similarity scores to identify the two classes
(’similar’ and ’unsimilar’). Different thresholds produce different results
in terms of precision, recall, and F1-score when compared to the anno­
tated dataset. A threshold that is too low classifies all sentences as

Fig. 2. Box plots showing the different range of semantic similarity scores over the groups of ‘similar’ and ‘unsimilar’ pairs of sentences using the Italian BERT and
ITALIANLEGAL-BERT models. The red dashed line shows the optimized similarity threshold on the results of the four models.
9

D. Licari and G. Comandè

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105908

Table 8
It summarizes the number of tokens using the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT tokenizer. It shows the central tendency, dispersion, minimum, maximum, and 25th, 50th, 75th
percentiles.
Label

Count

Mean

STD

Min

25%

50%

75%

Max

Joint divorce – Religious
Joint divorce – Civil
Litigation divorce - Religious
Litigation divorce - Civil
Judicial separation
TOTAL

200
200
200
200
200
1000

1811.5
1760.5
2021.8
1925.4
2499.1
2003.7

941
875.1
1363.1
1490.5
1947.4
1402.4

934
835
733
631
641
631

1342.2
1319.5
1186
1075
945.7
1200.7

1558
1569
1514
1389
1961
1561

1914.7
1917
2216
2129.2
3383.5
2195.75

9898
9522
9606
10062
11396
11396

The Table 8 presents a summary of token counts using the
ITALIANLEGAL-BERT tokenizer for different labels or categories. It in­
cludes statistical measures such as count, mean, standard deviation,
minimum, maximum, and percentiles (25th, 50th, and 75th) to describe
the distribution of token counts within each label. Additionally, the
table provides an overall "TOTAL" row that showcases statistics for the
entire dataset. This information offers valuable insights into the length
and variability of token counts, providing a better understanding of the
characteristics of the legal documents that are being classified.
The evaluation encompasses both the standard ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT
models and their LSG variants, which incorporate the LSG attention
mechanism to effectively process long sequences. By comparing the per­
formance of these models, we aim to assess their effectiveness in handling
lengthy legal texts and their potential application in real-world scenarios
where accurate classification of lengthy documents is required.
The results obtained from this benchmark will provide valuable in­
sights into the capabilities of ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT models in handling
long legal texts and their potential applicability in various legal do­
mains. Moreover, it highlights the advantages of utilizing the LSG ver­
sions of the models, which enable improved performance on long text
classification tasks that surpass the token limit of the standard BERT
model.
Dataset. Also, for this task, we created an ad-hoc dataset by taking
1000 judgments of 5 topics on family law from the Civil Court of Genoa
with which we have an agreement. The dataset contains an equal
number of documents relating to Civil and Religious joint divorces, Civil
and Religious litigation divorces, and separations. It was split stratified
on the topic of the document, 70% of the data was used to train the
models, 10% of the training data for validation, and 30% for testing.
Training procedure. The training procedure involved fine-tuning
the Italian BERT and ITALIAN-LEGAL BERT models, including their
LSG (Local-Sparse-Global) variants, with a linear sequence classifier on
top. All models were trained using the same hyperparameter configu­
ration, as detailed in Table A.15 in the Appendix. To handle the chal­
lenge of processing long documents efficiently, we set the maximum
sequence length for LSG models to 2500 tokens, which corresponds to
the 80th percentile of the dataset. This choice of sequence length aims to
balance capturing the necessary information while maintaining
computational efficiency. In addition to the maximum sequence length,
we also explored a sliding window approach to handle very long doc­
uments. This approach involves dividing a long text into smaller chunks,
typically consisting of 512 tokens, with a certain amount of overlap
between the chunks. In this case, we used a 50 percent overlap to
minimize information loss that may occur due to abrupt cuts. Each
chunk was then assigned a document label.
During training, the model was trained on these sub-sequences (or
chunks) to predict the corresponding document label. The final predic­
tion for a document was determined by selecting the mode (most
frequent prediction) across all sub-sequences (or chunks) of the docu­
ment. This aggregation strategy helps consolidate predictions and pro­
vide a single label for the entire document. By employing this training
procedure, we aim to optimize the models’ performance in accurately
classifying long legal documents, effectively utilizing the strengths of the
LSG variants and handling document length variations through the
sliding window approach.

Table 9
MCC scores and train time in seconds on document classification datasets.
Model

Max seq

sliding

MCC (%)

Runtime (s)

ITA-BERT

512
512
512
512
2500
2500
512
512
2500
2500
512
512

FALSE
TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
FALSE
TRUE

85.05
75.08
85.85
85.91
82.97
87.56
86.29
81.62
87.94
91.09
85.44
74.10

153
468
161
787
705
1053
151
400
716
965
73
134

ITA-LEGAL-BERT-FP
LSG- ITA-LEGAL-BERT-FP
ITA-LEGAL-BERT-SC
LSG-ITA-LEGAL-BERT-SC
DISTIL-ITA-LEGAL-BERT

Evaluation. In the evaluation Table 9, it was observed that the LSG
version of the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT model, which was pre-trained from
scratch, achieved better performance (the highest MCC score of 91.09%)
compared to other models. This indicates that the LSG variant effectively
captures the complex patterns and dependencies present in long legal
documents, leading to more accurate predictions. Both the sliding
window approach and the non-sliding window approach were evalu­
ated, and the LSG model consistently outperformed the other models in
both scenarios. This suggests that the LSG variant not only excels in
handling long documents but also maintains its performance when uti­
lizing the sliding window technique to handle document length limita­
tions (Table 9).
Additionally, the distilled model, which incorporates knowledge
distillation techniques, showed superior performance compared to the
model trained with general knowledge. Notably, the distilled model
exhibited more than twice the training speed, indicating its efficiency in
training without compromising performance (MCC score of 85.44%
without sliding).
Overall, the evaluation results highlight the effectiveness of the LSG
version of the ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT model for document classification
tasks, its compatibility with the sliding window approach, and the ad­
vantages of utilizing knowledge distillation techniques for improved
performance and training efficiency.
5. Limitations
The main limitations come from the limited computational resources
with which our models were trained. We are aware that a larger batch
size, extended parameters optimization, and a larger data set could lead
to better results. Secondly, the type of downstream task could be a
limiting factor in model performance. ITALIAN LEGAL BERTs are
designed to improve current performance in complex Italian legal tasks,
where domain knowledge is very important.
Notably, there exist scenarios where domain-adaptive pre-training,
as exemplified by LEGAL-BERT, may not yield a substantial advantage
over finetuning. Such circumstances have been explored in studies that
scrutinize the nuanced interplay between pre-training and fine-tuning
processes in natural language understanding tasks [9]. For instance,
certain legal prediction tasks may exhibit intricacies where fine-tuning,
10

D. Licari and G. Comandè

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105908

with its ability to adapt more directly to task-specific data, could prove
to be equally or even more effective than pre-training on large-scale
legal corpora. Moreover, it is imperative to recognize that
domain-adaptive pre-training, particularly on extensive legal datasets,
entails more demanding requirements in terms of training time, memory
usage, and computational resources compared to fine-tuning. The de­
cision to opt for pre-training should, therefore, be driven not only by the
task but also by practical constraints and available resources [37]. In
addition, all downstream tasks on which the models were tested used
civil law data. The main motivation lies in the project on which this
work is based, namely the optimization of the civil justice system
through the use of artificial intelligence techniques (predictivejustice.
eu). For a complete evaluation on Italian law, the models should be
evaluated downstream of different types of jurisdictions (e.g., civil,
criminal, and administrative), which we intend to do in the near future.
Another common limitation of all Deep Learning systems is that they
are not easily interpreted and maintain biases in the data on which it was
trained. In particular, biases in the data can lead the model to generate
stereotypical or biased content. The biases analysis depends on the
specific downstream task and deserves further investigation. Finally,
Legal BERT models may not fully understand the nuances and com­
plexities of the legal system and may provide incorrect or incomplete
information. It is important that these models are carefully designed and
tested to ensure their reliability and accuracy both from the perspective
of the quality of the training dataset and subsequent monitoring to
prevent data drift. Overall, Legal Bert models have the potential to
greatly improve the efficiency and effectiveness of legal systems.
Although there are some legitimate concerns about their use, in many
applications for decision support or automation of simple legal tasks, the
benefits of these models outweigh the risks.

through domain-adapted pre-training (ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-FP) or
training from scratch on the Italian legal domain (ITALIAN-LEGALBERT-SC). Two additional variants have been proposed and evaluated to
address specific requirements. The first variant is a compact version of
ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-FP, offering nearly three times faster inference
and training while maintaining a comparable level of performance. This
variant is ideal for applications with limited computational resources or
scenarios involving large-scale data processing. The second variant le­
verages the Local-Sparse-Global (LSG) attention mechanism, enabling
ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT models to handle exceptionally long sequences,
up to 16 K tokens. Through this approach, improvements have been
observed in various downstream tasks within the Italian legal domain,
including named entity recognition, sequence classification, sentence
similarity, and document classification. The selection of the most suit­
able model depends on the specific use case, with the distilled model
striking a balance between performance and inference/training speed.
On the other hand, models trained from scratch demonstrate remarkable
focus on the legal domain and excel in highly domain-specific and
complex applications. Looking ahead, future work aims to explore the
potential of ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT models in more complex tasks such
as rhetorical role identification [38], similar case retrieval, legal text
summarization, comprehension, law holdings extraction, and legal
question answering. These advancements hold promise for further ad­
vancements in NLP legal research, computational law, and legal tech­
nology applications, ultimately benefiting the legal community and
facilitating more sophisticated legal analysis and decision-making
processes.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

6. Conclusion and future direction
This article introduces ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT models, specifically
designed to enhance the performance of natural language processing
(NLP) tasks in the Italian legal domain. These models provide pretrained linguistic representations tailored to Italian law, obtained

Data availability
The data that has been used is confidential.

Appendix A. Settings and the Hyperparameters
Table A10, Table A11, Table A12, Table A13, Table A14, Table A15
Table A.10
The settings and the hyperparameters for training the MLM
ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-FP.
Parameter

Values

architectures
scheduler
adam_beta1
adam_beta2
adam_epsilon
initial learning rate
lr_scheduler_type
num_attention_heads
num_hidden_layers
hidden_act
hidden_dropout_prob
hidden_size
intermediate_size
layer_norm_eps
max_position_embeddings
position_embedding_type
num_train_epochs
batch_size
vocab_size
type_vocab_size

BertForMaskedLM
AdamW
0.9
0.999
1.00E-08
5.00E-05
linear
12
12
gelu
0.1
768
3072
1.00E-12
512
absolute
4
10
32,102
2

11

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105908

D. Licari and G. Comandè

Table A.11
The settings and the hyperparameters for training the
MLM ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-SC.
Parameter

Values

adam_beta2
adam_epsilon
initial learning rate
lr_scheduler_type
num_attention_heads
num_hidden_layers
hidden_act
hidden_dropout_prob
hidden_size
intermediate_size
layer_norm_eps
max_position_embeddings
position_embedding_type
num_train_epochs
batch_size
vocab_size
type_vocab_size

0.999
1.00E-08
2.00E-05
linear
1.20E+01
1.20E+01
gelu
0.1
768
3072
0.00001
514
absolute
4.00E+00
10
32,005
1

Table A.12
The settings and the hyperparameters for training the DISTIL-ITALIANLEGAL-BERT.
Parameter

Values

teacher model
student
pooling mode
loss
scheduler
adambeta1
adambeta2
adam epsilon
initial learning rate
lr scheduler type
num attention heads
num hidden layers
hidden act
hidden dropout prob
hidden size
intermediate size
layer norm eps
max position embeddings
position embedding type
num train epochs
batch size
vocab size
type vocab size
warm-up steps
evaluation step
automatic mixed precision

ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-FP
CamemBERTForMaskedLM
Mean tokens
MSELoss
AdamW
0.9
0.999
1e-06
1e-4
linear
12
4
gelu
0.1
768
3072
1e-12
512
absolute
4
24
32,102
2
1000
5000
True

Table A.13
The settings and the hyperparameters for training the pipeline’s named entity
recognizer.
Parameter

Values

pipeline
ner architectures
transformer architectures
tokenizer name
scheduler
adam epsilon
batch size
max steps
learning rate
num warmup steps

[”transformer”,”ner”]
”spacy.TransitionBasedParser.v2”
Italian-BERT or ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERTs
BertTokenizer or ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-SC
AdamW
1e-07
128
20,000
5e-05 (linearly lr decay)
250 steps
(continued on next page)

12

D. Licari and G. Comandè

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105908

Table A.13 (continued )
Parameter

Values

patience early stopping
dropout rate
accumulate gradient
test size
validation size

1600 steps
0.1
3
0.2
0.1 (on best F1 score)

Table A.14
Hyperparameters configuration for sequence classification models.
Parameter

Values

Parameter
tokenizer_name
transformer architectures
classifier
scheduler
adam_epsilon
batch_size
Epochs
learning_rate
num_warmup_steps
weight_decay
evaluation_strategy
test_size
validation_size

Values
BertTokenizer or ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-SC
Italian-BERT or ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERTs
Linear, MLP, LSTM, or CNN
AdamW
2.00E-05
8
[1,5]
2.00E-05
0.06
0.01
epoch
0.1
0.1 (on best MCC score)

Table A.15
Hyperparameters configuration for document classification models.
Parameter

Values

tokenizer name
transformer architectures
classifier
scheduler
adam epsilon
batch size
max sequence length
Epochs
learning rate
num warmup steps
evaluation strategy
patience early stopping
test size
validation size

BertTokenizer or ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT-SC
Italian-BERT or (LSG-)ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERTs
Linear
AdamW
1e-08
8 (4 for LSG Models)
512 (2500 for LSG Models)
[1,10]
4e-05 (linear schedule)
0.06
500 steps
3 evaluations
0.3
0.1 (on best MCC score)

References

[5] Polignano M, Basile P, Degemmis M, Semeraro G, Basile V. Alberto: Italian Bert
language understanding model for NLP challenging tasks based on tweets. CLiC-it.
2019.
[6] Carofiglio G. Con parole precise. Laterza, Roma Bari: Breviario di Scrittura Civile;
2015.
[7] M. Rosati, Forte e chiaro: Il linguaggio del giudice, IL LINGUAGGIO DEL
PROCESSO (2016) 115–9. URL https://www.uniba.it/ricerca/dipartimenti/sistemi
-giuridici-ed-economici/e.
[8] Chalkidis I, Fergadiotis M, Malakasiotis P, Aletras N, Androutsopoulos I. LEGALBERT: the muppets straight out of law school. Findings of the association for
computational linguistics: EMNLP 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics;
2020. p. 2898–904. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.261.
OnlineURL, https://aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.261.
[9] Wolf T, Debut L, Sanh V, Chaumond J, Delangue C, Moi A, Cistac P, Rault T, Louf R,
Funtowicz M, Davison J, Shleifer S, von Platen P, Ma C, Jernite Y, Plu J, Xu C, Le
Scao T, Gugger S, Drame M, Lhoest Q, Rush A. Transformers: state-of-the-Art
Natural Language Processing. In: Proceedings of the 2020 conference on empirical
methods in natural language processing: system demonstrations. Association for
Computational Linguistics; 2020. p. 38–45. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.
emnlp-demos.6. OnlineURL, https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-demos.6.
[10] L. Zheng, N. Guha, B.R. Anderson, P. Henderson, D.E. Ho, When does pretraining
help? Assessing self-supervised learning for law and the CaseHOLD dataset, arXiv:2
104.08671 [cs] (2021).
[11] Lippi M, Pa lka P, Contissa G, Lagioia F, Micklitz H-W, Sartor G, Torroni P.
CLAUDETTE: an automated detector of potentially unfair clauses in online terms of

[1] Lee J, Yoon W, Kim S, Kim D, Kim S, So CH, Kang J. BioBERT: a pre-trained
biomedical language representation model for biomedical text mining.
Bioinformatics 2019. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btz682.
btz682ArXiv:1901.08746 [cs].
[2] Alsentzer E, Murphy J, Boag W, Weng W-H, Jindi D, Naumann T, McDermott M.
Publicly available clinical BERT embeddings. In: Proceedings of the 2nd clinical
natural language processing workshop. Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA: Association
for Computational Linguistics; 2019. p. 72–8. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W191909. URL, https://aclanthology.org/W19-1909.
[3] Beltagy I, Lo K, Cohan A. SciBERT: a pretrained language model for scientific text.
In: Proceedings of the 2019 conference on empirical methods in natural language
processing and the 9th international joint conference on natural language
processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP). Hong Kong, China: Association for Computational
Linguistics; 2019. p. 3615–20. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D19-1371. URL, http
s://aclanthology.org/D19-1371.
[4] Caselli T, Basile V, Mitrovi´c J, Granitzer M. HateBERT: retraining BERT for abusive
language detection in English. In: Proceedings of the 5th workshop on online abuse
and harms (WOAH 2021). Association for Computational Linguistics; 2021.
p. 17–25. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.woah-1.3. OnlineURL, https://acla
nthology.org/2021.woah-1.3.

13

D. Licari and G. Comandè

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105908
proceedings. Bozen-Bolzano, Italy: CEUR; 2022. iSSN: 1613-0073. URL, https://
ceur-ws.org/Vol-3256/km4law3.
[25] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, K. Toutanova, BERT: pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding, arXiv:1810.04805 [cs]
2019). doi:10.48550/arXiv.1810.04805.
[26] Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, Uszkoreit J, Jones L, Gomez AN, Kaiser L,
Polosukhin I. Attention is all you need. CoRR 2017. abs/1706.03762arXiv:
1706.03762.
[27] Y. Liu, M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy, M. Lewis, L.
Zettlemoyer, V. Stoyanov, RoBERTa: A. Robustly optimized BERT pretraining
approach, arXiv:1907.11692 [cs] (Jul. 2019). doi:10.48550/arXiv.1907.11692.
[28] Schuster M, Nakajima K, Japanese and Korean voice search, 2012 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). In:
Conference Name: ICASSP 2012 2012 IEEE international conference on acoustics,
speech and signal processing. Kyoto: Japan Publisher: IEEE; 2012. p. 5149–52.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP.2012.6289079. ISBN: 9781467300469
9781467300452 9781467300445 PlaceURL, http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document
/6289079/.
[29] Martin L, Muller B, Suarez PJO, Dupont Y, Romary L, de la Clergerie EV, Seddah D,
Sagot B. CamemBERT: a tasty French Language Model. In: Proceedings of the 58th
annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics; 2020. p. 7203–19.
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.645. arXiv:1911.03894 [cs].
[30] T. Kudo, J. Richardson, SentencePiece: a simple and language independent
subword Tokenizer and Detokenizer for Neural Text Processing, arXiv:1808.06226
[cs] (Aug. 2018). doi:10.48550/arXiv.1808.06226.
[31] Mattmann CA, Zitting JL. Tika in action. Shelter Island, NY: Manning Publications;
2012. oCLC: ocn731912756.
[32] Reimers N, Gurevych I. Sentence-Bert: sentence embeddings using Siamese Bertnetworks. In: Proceedings of the 2019 conference on empirical methods in natural
language processing. Association for Computational Linguistics; 2019. URL, htt
p://arxiv.org/abs/1908.10084.
[33] M. Honnibal, I. Montani, spaCy 2: natural language understanding with Bloom
embeddings, convolutional neural networks and incremental parsing, to appear
(2017).
[34] H. Nakayama, T. Kubo, J. Kamura, Y. Taniguchi, X. Liang, doccano: text annotation
tool for human, software available from https://github.com/doccano/doccano
(2018). URL https://github.com/doccano/doccano.
[35] Lample G, Ballesteros M, Subramanian S, Kawakami K, Dyer C. Neural
architectures for named entity recognition. CoRR 2016. abs/1603.01360.
[36] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M.
Blondel, A. Mu¨ller, J. Nothman, G. Louppe, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg,
J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, Duchesnay,
Scikitlearn: machine learning in Python, arXiv:1201.0490 [cs] (2018). doi:10.48
550/arXiv.1201.0490.
[37] Strubell E, Ganesh A, McCallum A. Energy and policy considerations for deep
learning in NLP. In: Proceedings of the 57th annual meeting of the association for
computational linguistics. Florence, Italy: Association for Computational
Linguistics; 2019. p. 3645–50. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P19-1355. URL, http
s://aclanthology.org/P19-1355.
[38] Walker VR, Pillaipakkamnatt K, Davidson AM, Linares M, Pesce DJ. Automatic
classification of rhetorical roles for sentences: comparing rule-based scripts with
machine learning. ASAIL@ICAIL. 2019.

service. Artif Intell Law 2019;27(2):117–39. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10506-01909243-2. doi:10.1007/s10506-019-09243-2URL.
[12] G. Zhang, D. Lillis, P. Nulty, Can Domain Pre-training Help Interdisciplinary
Researchers from Data Annotation Poverty? A Case Study of Legal Argument
Mining with BERT-based Transformers 10.
[13] Zhang G, Nulty P, Lillis D. Enhancing legal argument mining with domain pretraining and neural networks. J Data Min Digit Human 2022;NLP4DH:9147.
https://doi.org/10.46298/jdmdh.9147. URL, https://jdmdh.episciences.org/9147.
[14] C. Condevaux, S. Harispe, L.S.G. Attention: Extrapolation of pretrained
Transformers to long sequences, arXiv:2210.15497 [cs] (Oct. 2022). doi:10.4855
0/arXiv.2210.15497.
[15] Harold JS, Lee E, Jeffrey AS, Andrew DM, Theodore JR, Sara CB. Supreme court
database. Version 2020 release 01. Washington University Law; 2020. URL, htt
p://Supremecourtdatabase.org.
[16] Chalkidis I, Androutsopoulos I, Aletras N. Neural legal judgment prediction in
English. In: Proceedings of the 57th annual meeting of the association for
computational linguistics. Florence, Italy: Association for Computational
Linguistics; 2019. p. 4317–23. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P19-1424. URL, http
s://aclanthology.org/P19-1424.
[17] Chalkidis I, Fergadiotis M, Tsarapatsanis D, Aletras N, Androutsopoulos I,
Malakasiotis P. Paragraph-level rationale extraction through regularization: a case
study on European Court of Human Rights Cases. In: Proceedings of the 2021
conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for computational
linguistics: human language technologies. Association for Computational
Linguistics; 2021. p. 226–41. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.22.
OnlineURL, https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.22.
[18] J. Cui, X. Shen, F. Nie, Z. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Chen, A survey on legal judgment
prediction: datasets, metrics, models and challenges, arXiv:2204.04859 [cs]
(2022). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2204.04859.
[19] M. Masala, R. Iacob, A.S. Uban, M.-A. Cidotã, H. Velicu, T. Rebedea, M. Popescu,
jurBERT: a Romanian BERT model for legal judgement prediction, NLLP (2021).
doi:10.18653/v1/2021.nllp-1.8.
[20] Douka S, Abdine H, Vazirgiannis M, Hamdani RE, Amariles DR. JuriBERT: a
masked-language model adaptation for French legal text. NLLP; 2021. https://doi.
org/10.18653/v1/2021.nllp-1.9.
[21] Xiao C, Hu X, Liu Z, Tu C, Sun M. Lawformer: a pre-trained language model for
Chinese legal long documents. AI Open 2021;2:79–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
aiopen.2021.06.003. URL, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2666651021000176.
[22] M. AL-Qurishi, S. AlQaseemi, R. Soussi, AraLegal-BERT: a pretrained language
model for Arabic Legal text, arXiv:2210.08284 [cs] (Oct. 2022). doi:10.4855
0/arXiv.2210.08284.
[23] Tagarelli A, Simeri A. Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre-trained
language representation models with application to the italian civil code. Artificial
Intelligence and Law 2022;30(3):417–73. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10506-02109301-8. 10.1007/s10506-021-09301-8. URL.
[24] Licari D, Comand`e G, ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT: A. Pre-trained transformer language
model for Italian Law. In: Symeonidou D, Yu R, Ceolin D, Poveda-Villalo´n M,
Audrito D, Caro LD, Grasso F, Nai R, Sulis E, Ekaputra FJ, Kutz O, Troquard N,
editors. Companion Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on
knowledge engineering and knowledge management, Vol. 3256 of CEUR workshop

14

