systems
Article

Pre-Trained Transformer-Based Models for Text Classification
Using Low-Resourced Ewe Language
Victor Kwaku Agbesi 1 , Wenyu Chen 1, *, Sophyani Banaamwini Yussif 1 , Md Altab Hossin 2 ,
Chiagoziem C. Ukwuoma 3,4 , Noble A. Kuadey 1 , Colin Collinson Agbesi 5 , Nagwan Abdel Samee 6 ,
Mona M. Jamjoom 7 and Mugahed A. Al-antari 8, *
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

*

Citation: Agbesi, V.K.; Chen, W.;
Yussif, S.B.; Hossin, M.A.; Ukwuoma,
C.C.; Kuadey, N.A.; Agbesi, C.C.;
Abdel Samee, N.; Jamjoom, M.M.;
Al-antari, M.A. Pre-Trained
Transformer-Based Models for Text
Classification Using Low-Resourced
Ewe Language. Systems 2024, 12, 1.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
systems12010001
Academic Editor: Vladimír Bureš
Received: 23 October 2023
Revised: 25 November 2023
Accepted: 15 December 2023
Published: 19 December 2023

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of
China (UESTC), Chengdu 611731, China; vkagbesi@std.uestc.edu.cn (V.K.A.);
sophyaniyussif2@yahoo.com (S.B.Y.); nkuadey@htu.edu.gh (N.A.K.)
School of Innovation and Entrepreneurship, Chengdu University, No. 2025 Chengluo Avenue,
Chengdu 610106, China; altabbd@cdu.edu.cn
College of Nuclear Technology and Automation Engineering, Chengdu University of Technology,
Chengdu 610059, China; ukwuoma@std.uestc.edu.cn
Sichuan Engineering Technology Research Center for Industrial Internet Intelligent Monitoring and
Application, Chengdu University of Technology, Chengdu 610059, China
Faculty of Applied Science and Technology, Koforidua Technical University,
Koforidua P.O. Box KF-981, Ghana; ccagbesi@ktu.edu.gh
Department of Information Technology, College of Computer and Information Sciences, Princess Nourah bint
Abdulrahman University, P.O. Box 84428, Riyadh 11671, Saudi Arabia; nmabdelsamee@pnu.edu.sa
Department of Computer Sciences, College of Computer and Information Sciences, Princess Nourah bint
Abdulrahman University, Riyadh 11671, Saudi Arabia; mmjamjoom@pnu.edu.sa
Department of Artificial Intelligence, College of Software & Convergence Technology, Daeyang AI Center,
Sejong University, Seoul 05006, Republic of Korea
Correspondence: cwy@uestc.edu.cn (W.C.); en.mualshz@sejong.ac.kr (M.A.A.-a.)

Abstract: Despite a few attempts to automatically crawl Ewe text from online news portals and magazines, the African Ewe language remains underdeveloped despite its rich morphology and complex
"unique" structure. This is due to the poor quality, unbalanced, and religious-based nature of the
crawled Ewe texts, thus making it challenging to preprocess and perform any NLP task with current
transformer-based language models. In this study, we present a well-preprocessed Ewe dataset for
low-resource text classification to the research community. Additionally, we have developed an
Ewe-based word embedding to leverage the low-resource semantic representation. Finally, we have
fine-tuned seven transformer-based models, namely BERT-based (cased and uncased), DistilBERTbased (cased and uncased), RoBERTa, DistilRoBERTa, and DeBERTa, using the preprocessed Ewe
dataset that we have proposed. Extensive experiments indicate that the fine-tuned BERT-base-cased
model outperforms all baseline models with an accuracy of 0.972, precision of 0.969, recall of 0.970,
loss score of 0.021, and an F1-score of 0.970. This performance demonstrates the model’s ability to
comprehend the low-resourced Ewe semantic representation compared to all other models, thus
setting the fine-tuned BERT-based model as the benchmark for the proposed Ewe dataset.
Keywords: Ewe language; text classification; pre-trained language models; natural language processing

Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.

1. Introduction

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

Text classification (TC) is a valuable text retrieval task for handling enormous text
inputs. It automatically classifies and establishes different text samples using natural
language processing (NLP) and data mining tools with machine and deep learning techniques [1]. In the TC procedure, various texts are accepted, and a model represents the
text as a vector. The vector is then fed into a model for training until a satisfactory mean
is achieved [2]. Generally, TC tasks are handled by deep learning (DL) models. These

This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

Systems 2024, 12, 1. https://doi.org/10.3390/systems12010001

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/systems

Systems 2024, 12, 1

2 of 22

models classify documents into diverse classes: entertainment, international, business,
politics, health tips, and sports, leading to several automated systems, including detection
systems [3], customer-centered chat or feedback systems [4], news event systems [5], sentiment or emotional applications [6], and spontaneous text summarization [7]. With the
power of systems based on the Internet of Things (IoT) and linguistic development, the
world is moving toward a machine-to-human (M2H) era where data is constantly generated
across different channels [8].
Currently, DL models have proven to be efficient in downstream tasks, including
text classification and analysis [9,10] and language recognition [11]. These studies have
demonstrated their efficacy in retrieving contextual information and patterns on different
scales. They also automatically acquire valuable features from any set of raw texts [11].
Recurrent neural networks (RNN) [12] perform accurately with NLP tasks such as partof-speech (POS) tagging and question-and-answer (QA). However, when dealing with
long-term dependencies, typical RNNs are restricted. This occurs when the input sequence
covers lengthy intervals, resulting in disappearing and ballooning gradient issues. The
long-short-term memory (LSTM) [13] and the gated recurrent unit (GRU) [14] neural
networks (NN) are two typical solutions that handle these challenges. They are effective at
capturing long-term dependencies, making them extensively utilized in a good number
of high-resource language (HRL) applications. The NLP community has recently shown
much interest in pre-trained language models (PLMs) [15,16]. With these models, a generic
language, for instance, Spanish, Chinese, or English, is used to learn a procedure to predict
the next word in a phrase. The retained data can then be applied to diverse downstream
NLP tasks. The pre-trained Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers
(BERT), as introduced in [17] and its cohorts, are pre-trained and based on well-known
transformer architectures [18]. BERT is a deeply bidirectional model pre-trained using a
large volume of text to predict randomly masked words from documents using a masked
language model (MLM). However, BERT and its associated PLMs prove their robustness in
various natural language tasks [19–22]. Yet, their performance with African low-resource
languages (ALRLs) like Ewe is not established due to the unavailability of labeled datasets
for these models to comprehend the semantics of these ALRLs as their native speakers do.
Transformer-based language models and pre-trained semantic representations shown
by word embedding (including Glove, word2vec, CBOW, and FastText) continuously
improve the performance of HRLs such as English, Chinese, German, and Spanish in
several NLP-based studies, yet researchers constantly focus on these HRLs for new NLP
systems [23–25]. However, little attention has been given to most African languages,
popularly classified as “low resource languages” (LRLs). The ÉV(Ewe), Swahili, Shumom,
N’Ko, Oromo, Twi, Amharic, and Fon are part of Africa’s dozens of languages grouped
as extremely low-resourced (vulnerable) [26]. These LRLs are languages with poor datasetting and a lack of available resources, including annotated datasets, lexical, syntactic,
and semantic tools such as dictionaries, dependency tree corpora, baseline algorithms with
results, and NLP statistical tools.
This study focuses on the Ewe language (ÉVegbe), spoken by over 20 million people,
primarily in Benin, Togo, Ghana, Liberia, Nigeria, and Niger-Congo. The language also
forms part of academic curricula studied at various education levels in West Africa. For
example, in Ghana, the language is learned in elementary through tertiary education, while
in Togo, the language is taught throughout the elementary education system. As natives
call it, it is a natural phonic language like many African languages and part of a group
of related languages known as Gbe, popularly in West Africa. The ÉVe (Ewe) language
is part of African languages that are highly low-resourced, complex-numerous, and lack
standard datasets [27]. Despite the necessity to boost regional trade and increase socioeconomic benefits across the sub-region in Africa, the undeveloped Ewe language, which
remains one of the significant languages in these regions, hinders native speakers from
achieving these goals. Additionally, today’s globalization guide, trade, and investment
benefits, among others, will not be achieved. Given this, developing and digitizing the Ewe

Systems 2024, 12, 1

3 of 22

language will benefit its native speakers, researchers, and investors. Additionally, it will
prevent language loss, expand regional trade, increase investment and development, and
improve educational and linguistic knowledge systems that can keep track of political and
demographic changes.
The high-performance scores of PLMs have proven their robustness and capabilities in
solving multi-class classification problems with several HRLs. However, this milestone is
yet to be achieved in the low-resourced Ewe language. The unavailability of a preprocessed
Ewe dataset, the absence of benchmark results, and the language’s complicated syntax
and dynamic sentence structure result in minimal research on using the Ewe text to solve
an NLP-based problem. Furthermore, researchers may doubt the language’s efficiency in
real-world applications due to its syntax and the large volume of noise it may generate
during its data-gathering phase since the noise may influence decision confidence, leading
to decision reversal. This is due to the text’s syntax complexity, limited resources, irrelevant
information in the text, data sparsity, and dialect variations, among others. The Ewe
language, like many African languages, has a complex and agglutinative syntax. This
means that words can be composed of multiple morphemes, and the word order may differ
from languages with more linear syntax, such as English. The intricate syntax can make it
challenging for NLP models to accurately parse and understand the structure of sentences,
which is essential for tasks like part-of-speech tagging and syntactic analysis. Also, Ewe is
a relatively low-resource language in NLP. This means fewer pre-trained models, datasets,
and language resources are available for Ewe than in widely spoken languages like Chinese,
English, or Spanish. Limited resources can also hinder the development of accurate
language models and classifiers for Ewe texts. Irrelevant or unintended information
in the Ewe text can influence decision confidence during training. The Ewe text data
may contain dialectal variations, code-switching between Ewe and other languages like
English, Arabic, or Swahili, spelling variations, and informal language usage. This noise
can make it challenging for text classification models to categorize the text into predefined
classes correctly. Lastly, Ewe is spoken in several countries (including Togo, Benin, and
Ghana), and there are dialectal variations among Ewe speakers in different countries. These
dialectal variations can affect the text’s syntax, vocabulary, and language usage. Text
classification models must account for these variations when working with Ewe texts from
diverse sources.
To this end, this study aims to provide a preprocessed dataset for the Ewe language to
solve the problem of the lack of data resources. This is to make data resources available for
future studies, preserve them, and provide a platform for their growth. Precisely, the “Ewe
news dataset” consists of six classes, namely coronavirus (COVID-19) news, local news,
business news, entertainment news, sports news, and political news. We also fine-tuned
seven transformer-based language models to explore the Ewe semantic representation. To
our knowledge, this is the first study to explore recent transformer-based models with the
Ewe language. The main contributions are as follows:
1.

2.

3.

We developed and preprocessed a low-resource EWE dataset for news classification.
The Ewe news dataset consists of 4264 news articles with six distinct classes. Each
news article comprises an average of 400 words;
Based on the Ewe news dataset, we developed a word embedding process for exploiting the semantic representation in the low-resource language. We further fine-tuned
seven transformer-based language models using the proposed Ewe dataset to explore
its semantic representation for text classification;
We evaluated the robustness and stability of our fine-tuned models in capturing the
exact semantic representation of the low-resourced Ewe text. State-of-the-art results
were achieved with the fine-tuned language models in each class. A deep comparative
study analyzed each model’s ability to capture strong semantic Ewe information.

The rest of this study is structured as follows. Section 2 provides the current literature
on low-resource languages; Section 3 describes the processes involved in creating the Ewe
news dataset and the methodology. We further present our results and analysis in Section 4.

Systems 2024, 12, 1

4 of 22

Finally, we conclude and recommend future studies on the low-resourced Ewe language
in Section 5.
2. Related Work
Interest in developing LRLs grows among native speakers, organizations, and researchers. This development generated only a few LRL studies compared with the number
of available studies on HRLs.
In [28], the authors developed and curated South Africa’s Sepedi and Setswana
datasets for a TC task. They affirmed that augmenting small data sets significantly affects the dataset’s quality and can produce an optimal result. The authors of [29] made
available two previously generated datasets for the Filipino language, each with two classes.
They argued that the dataset contained enough samples to train various DL methods. The
authors utilized the BERT and DistilBERT models with the new Filipino dataset, which
recorded an accuracy of 74.15% and 73.70% with a loss score of 0.5220 and 0.5274, respectively. The authors utilized a new dataset for a low-resourced Urdu-Arabic text and
adopted a DL method for a downstream task [30]. Kanan et al. upgraded the P-Stemmer
model with a combination of support vector machines (SVM), k-nearest neighbors (KNN),
naive Bayes (NB), Random Forest, and K-Star methods [31]. They focused on improving
the accuracy of the Arabic text classification task. They also developed an Arabic-based
dataset of 5000 Arabic texts divided into 5 different classes. Their Arabic-based dataset
comprised articles from online magazines, newspapers, and media portals. Although it has
been highlighted that their combined methods enhance the classification performance, the
NB classifier with P-Stemmer recorded an optimal F1-measure score (F1 = 0.752), which
is a significant improvement of about 2.44% compared with the same classifier without
P-Stemmer (F1 = 0.728). The sensitivity and effectiveness of feature-based classification
approaches using Arabic texts were examined in [32]. Specifically, the authors compared
semantic fusion and multiple-word (SF-MW) approaches with DL methods. They proposed
several improvements to the existing feature selection algorithms. These improvements
were made by combining the term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) method
with the Chi-Square, Information Gain, and Gini Index feature selection approaches. They
utilized NB, SVM, and Decision Tree (DT) as their classifiers in their experiments. Their
study split the BBC-Arabic dataset, which has 1250 data samples, into 4 classes, and the
Alj-News5 dataset, which has 1500 texts, into 5 classes. These samples were used to test
each classifier accordingly. They represented each text with a vector in their testing, so
70% of each dataset was used for training and 30% for testing. The SF-MW approach
to the SVM classifier performed better than the NB and DT classifiers, as shown by the
precision, recall, and F1-measure scores of 0.954, 0.945, and 0.945 (using the BBC-Arabic
dataset), respectively, and precision = 0.96, recall = 0.986, and F1-measure score = 0.969
(using Alj-News5). The findings from these approaches were significant to the linguistic
development of the Arabic language.
A new Vietnamese dataset for a classification task was introduced in [33]. Specifically,
the authors changed the original pipeline for Vietnamese text classification by reducing
the dimension of feature vectors based on the term frequency over the entire corpus that
was merged in the TF-IDF weighting phase, as opposed to applying feature selection
techniques after extracting a TFI document frequency feature vector with a substantial
dimension. Although the procedure decreased the computational complexity, we realized
the input vectors were weak because they ignored the excellent feature selection process.
Additionally, the authors adopted DL techniques to solve the TC problem associated with
some LRLs. A convolutional neural network (CNN) method was utilized to classify Arabic
texts [34]. With them, the fundamental difficulty was reducing the number of different terms
before implementing their tagging procedure. They also proposed a grouping mechanism
for efficiently classifying related Arabic semantics. The authors divided a 6000-word Arabic
news dataset into 4 categories. Their experiment combined the proposed Gstem method
with CNN to achieve an Arabic text classification task. They recorded an accuracy of 92.42%

Systems 2024, 12, 1

5 of 22

with the proposed method compared to 88.75% without Gstem. The authors used nine DL
methods to examine the effect of single- and multi-label Arabic TC [35]. The authors debated
the sensitivity of the Arabic TC process to the Word2Vec embedding model. They also
developed two Arabic-based datasets (SANAD and NADiA) for an Arabic classification.
According to them, the SANAD dataset on the HANGRU model was superior to the Arabic
classification. It achieved an accuracy of 0.958 compared to 0.886 in the NADiA dataset.
Recently, Liu et al. [36] constructed a multi-labeled corpus using short-text sentiment
texts for a downstream task. The authors of [9] explored a neural-network-based feature
extraction technique for a downstream task. According to them, an attention-based twolayer bidirectional gated recurrent (BiGRU) unit with a two-dimensional convolutional
neural network (2dCNN) was designed for the task. Their BiGRU layers extracted the
compositional semantics of the low-resource Ewe document. They later introduced a
feature selection algorithm to select distinct features for the classification task.
Researchers in [37] developed a colossal parallel religious-based dataset for the Ghanaian Twi language. They addressed problems uncounted during the data processing and
development phase and a latent desire for a successful NLP task. They further performed a
classification task with an unsupervised learning technique. From their study, it was clear
that it was not easy to make a “clean” dataset for a language with few resources, primarily
when the target samples were based on religion. Transformer-based PLMs incorporating fine-turning techniques have recently produced superior classification accuracy than
feature-based methods with several HRL datasets. Aside from our initial Ewe BERT-based
study [26], which utilizes a tiny Ewe news size for a TC task, BERT [17] and its successor
language models, such as robustly optimized BERT (RoBERTa) [38], DistilBERT [39], and
XLNet (Generalized Autoregressive Pretraining for Language Understanding) [40], have
been reported to attain state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on downstream tasks with the
advent of large-scale PLMs. However, these models have yet to be utilized for the Ewe
language; hence, their efficacy cannot be rated superior to the Ewe language. Motivated by
these SOTA performances with the language models mentioned above, this study seeks to
solve the text classification problem associated with the low-resourced Ewe language. To
our knowledge, no standard datasets or results use transformer-based models for the Ewe
language. Thus, this is the first study to add to the literature on LRLs.
3. Materials and Methodology
This section describes the details of the Ewe dataset, which includes data collection
and dataset description steps (See Figures 1 and 2). Additionally, we explain the efforts to
clear the collected data to ensure a standard Ewe text and create the Ewe text classification
conclude
Systems 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEWdataset. Also, we present a detailed description of each pre-trained model and 7 of
24
with their fine-tuning procedure. We also present the overall framework for solving the
text classification problem associated with the Ewe language in Figure 3.

Figure1.1.Sources
Sourcesofofthe
theEwe
Ewenews
newsdataset.
dataset.
Figure

Systems 2024, 12, 1

6 of 22

Systems 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW

12 of

Figure 1. Sources of the Ewe news dataset.

ΥW

, K =ΥW

~

.H 0 = softmax  Α / 3d  X (



, X =ΥW X ,C ,Qr = ZWq ,r , K r = ZWk ,r

QC = ~ q ,C C k ,C C
KαCT
+
Αi ,α = QiC

( a ) content −to − content

QiC KϕCT( i ,α )T


+

KαC Qϕr ( α ,i )T


( a ) content −to − position ( a ) position −to −content

where, K C , X C , and QC are the probable Ewe content vectors generated using the m
trices WqC ,WX ,C ,WkC ∈ R
and

d ×d

while the embedding vectors of all layers Z ∈ R

2k ×d

,Q

Kr are probable relative position vectors of the Ewe content using matrice
~

~

Wq,r ,Wk ,r ∈ Rd ×d . Furthermore, Α i ,α is an element of the attention matrix Α , repr
senting the attention score from token i to α . Qi

C

and α
(a)

th

the row of K C is Kα . The ϕ (i, α )
C

(

)

−1

th

is the i

th

row of the matrix Q
r

row of Kr is Kϕ ( i ,α ) . Finally, we sca
(b)

Figure
A pictorial
the Ewe
news dataset
based on each
class. (a)PLMs
Number
of news
artic
3dview
Α
by
a 2. of
factor
which
isbased
crucial
stabilizing
large-scale
during
trainin
Figure 2. A pictorial
view
the Ewe
newsof
dataset
on for
each class.
(a) Number
of news
articles
in each class; (b) Words in each article.
in each class; (b) [49].
Words in each article.
Table 1. Description of the Ewe news dataset.
Class

Ewe Text

English Meaning
According to research, more than
Le numekukuwo nu la, ame siwo wu
Coronavirus
770,000 people were infected by
770,000 ye xɔ COVID-19 le Ghana.
COVID-19 in Ghana.
Ghana Dukplɔla yɔ demokrasiThe Ghanaian President called the demPolitical
dukɔmeviwo ƒe habɔbɔa be woƒe tagbɔ ocratic–republican community to be
kɔ wu wo hatiwo.
more intelligent than its peers.
Habɔbɔ aɖe si xɔa ame ɖe agbe tso nya A life-saving organization has decided
Business
me be yeana hehe Ghanatɔ ewo.
to train ten Ghanaians.
The Nigerian government has taken
Nigeria dziɖuɖua wɔ afɔɖeɖe sesẽwo ɖe
Local
drastic measures against road accimɔdododzifɔkuwo ŋu.
dents.
Srɔ̃a ɖee fia be dɔléle sesẽ aɖe le fu ɖem Olu Jacob is suﬀering from a severe ailEntertainment
na Olu Jacob.
ment, his wife disclosed.
Xexeame ƒe Lãmesẽ Habɔbɔ ɖo lɛta ɖe The World Health Organization (WHO)
Ghana be woado go ame alafa ɖeka
has sent a letter to Ghana to meet a
Sports
hena hehexɔxɔ.
hundred people for training purposes.
Figure
3.
The
proposed
framework.
Figure 3. The proposed framework.
Total size

Note:Fine-tuning
Example of a collection of articles from diﬀerent African web sources.
3.3.6.

Size

794

358

1082

614

766

650

4264

3.1. Ewe Dataset Formation
Training
model suchthe
as Ewe
BERTnews
on a dataset.
small dataset
This part 3.2.
describes
all an
theextensive
procedures
for
developing
Thiscan lead
Preprocessing
and
Wordlanguage
Embedding
overfitting
issues.
Therefore,
leveraging
a
pre-trained
language
model
trained
includes the article selection process, a brief dataset description, preprocessing, and wordon a distin
In our preprocessing phase, all upper-case letters were changed to lower-case for u
dataset is advisable [49]. In this study, we leverage the knowledge acquired during pr
embedding procedures.
cased models and vice versa for cased models. We proceeded to clean the collected E
training for each model, allowing the model to adapt to our text classification task usin
texts (removing noises: hashtags, empty spaces, full stops, and punctuation from ea
the proposed Ewe news dataset.
3.1.1. Data Collection
We
fine-tuned
both the
cased
uncased
versions ofnews
our BERT
models
The quality of a
news
dataset is
critical
in and
creating a
high-quality
dataset
since separate
on
the
proposed
Ewe
dataset
using
the
RAdam
optimizer.
The
initial
learning
it defines its classification effectiveness. English-based news datasets such as 20 News-rate was s
to 1e-4 and the batch size was 16. During this process, we adhered to a maximum sequen
groups1 , Reuters-215782 , and RCV13 comprise thousands of articles collected from several
length of 128. We used the Adam optimizer to finetune the DistilBERT cased and uncase
news websites, news magazines, and newsletters (newspapers) to create the different news
models on the Ewe dataset, just as with the BERT models. The learning rate was 1e-4 an
corpora. Similarly, news datasets in Arabic (ALJ-news dataset [41]), Uzbek [42], Urdu
the batch size was 32, even though the model was smaller. During the fine-tuning stag
(Urdu-news [43]), and South African (Setswana and Sepedi-news [28]) languages were
we realized that the generalization of both case and uncased DistilBERT models was n
also collected from
a cross-section of news portals. For our study, the Ewe news dataset
satisfactory with the larger batch size; hence, we used a smaller batch size, 16. For th
4 , Voice of Africa5 ,
was collected from
popular
portals, which
include
Ghana News
RoBERTa andnews
DistilRoBERTa
models,
we fine-tuned
according
to [40] and used th
8 My Joy News9 , and Citi News10 . The portals were
Togo First6 , Punch
News7 ,
BBC-Africa
argmax
directly on
the ,
outputs
of the last layer with a learning rate of 1e-4 and a bat
selected to represent
various
categories,
as politics,
coronavirus,
business,
size of 8. For
DeBERTa,
we such
fine-tuned
based on the
exact sports,
hyperparameters
described
entertainment,the
and local
were
automatically
extracted
using the
originalnews.
studyThe
[47].news
The articles
validation
and test
accuracies were
recorded
for all expe
11 , as
mentallibrary
configurations,
with
each
setup
k-fold
cross-validation,
where
k = 5.
open-source Python
Beautiful
Soup
in using
[29,42].
Eight native
speakers
of the
Ewe language are invited to label the dataset simultaneously. The ultimate designation is
verified after obtaining confirmation from all participants in a solitary, sealed gathering.

Systems 2024, 12, 1

7 of 22

11, x FOR PEER REVIEW

of 24 as agreed. ApproxiHence each article was labeled with its corresponding category7 data
mately 9815 news articles were extracted from these portals, and 6756 were clean. During
the cleaning phase, we realized that several article duplications led to the deletion and
reduction of some classes. For example, we recorded over 500 newspaper duplications in
the coronavirus class. This is because most of these news portals obtain COVID-19 news
from other websites and credit the source. In total, 4264 news articles were labeled and
grouped into 6 categories.

3.1.2. Ewe News Dataset Description
Compared to HRLs, developing a labeled dataset for the low-resourced Ewe language
has been a major challenge due to the unavailability of Ewe texts.
In this study, we collected and preprocessed an Ewe-based text named “Ewe news
dataset” using publicly available news articles from web sources in Togo, Benin, Ghana,
Liberia, and Nigeria, as illustrated in Figure 1. These articles were translated using the
Google Translate application and further validated by eight professional Ewe tutors in
Ghana [44]. The aim was to ensure lingual efficiency, validate proper Ewe text represenFigure 1. Sources of the Ewe news dataset.
tation, and avoid errors in representation or article duplication in the proposed dataset.
A total of 1,705,600 Ewe words were translated, making 4264 different Ewe news articles
grouped into six classes. Each article had an average of 400 words (see Figure 2a). The
dataset consists of the following classes: COVID-19 news, political news, business news,
local news, entertainment news, and sports news, as shown in Table 1. The COVID-19
news articles comprise articles related to the coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2), delta, omicron,
and alpha variants, totaling 794 articles. The political news articles are items pertaining to
governmental policies and politics in Ghana, Togo, Burkina Faso, and Nigeria, comprising
358 articles. A total of 1082 articles were developed for the business news, which includes
news on development, investment and finance, and local trade within the listed countries.
In the entertainment news, we collected 614 articles, comprising gossip, lifestyle, music,
and movie articles. The local news includes articles on education and technology and some
daily reports in Ghana, Burkina Faso, Nigeria, and Togo, with 766 articles. Finally, the
sports news recorded 650 articles based on the news in football, hockey, boxing, athletics,
and players’ lifestyle news, including transfers (see Figure 2b). We also show an example
(a)
of each Ewe news headline, its (b)
English meaning in each class, and its corresponding size
(see
Table
1).
To
enhance
data
conciseness
accuracy,
Figure 2. A pictorial view of the Ewe news dataset based
each class.and
(a) Number
of redundant
news articlesinformation, such as
repeating
news
and
symbols,
was
removed
from
the
dataset.
All references to pictures,
in each class; (b) Words in each article.
emojis, and URLs were deleted from the data to maintain the textual relevance for the
classification
Table 1. Description of the
Ewe newstask.
dataset.
Class
Coronavirus
Class
Coronavirus
Political
Political

Business
Business
Local Local
Entertainment
Entertainment
Sports

Sports

Ewe Text of the Ewe news dataset.
English Meaning
Table 1. Description

Size
According to research, more than
Le numekukuwo nu la, ame siwo wu
770,000 people
were infected
by
794
Text le Ghana.
English
Meaning
770,000 ye xɔEwe
COVID-19
COVID-19 in Ghana.
Le numekukuwo nu la, ame siwo wu
According to research, more than 770,000
Ghana Dukplɔla yɔ demokrasiThe Ghanaian President called the dem770,000 ye xO COVID-19 le Ghana.
people were infected by COVID-19 in Ghana.
dukɔmeviwo
ƒe habɔbɔa
community
be the 358
Ghana
DukplOlabeyOwoƒe tagbɔ ocratic–republican
The Ghanaian
President to
called
kɔ
wu wo hatiwo.
more
intelligent than its
peers. to be more
demokrasi-dukOmeviwo
ƒe habObOa be
democratic–republican
community
organization
has
decided
Habɔbɔ
aɖe
si xɔa
tso nya A life-savingintelligent
woƒe
tagbO
kOame
wu ɖe
woagbe
hatiwo.
than
its peers.
1082
HabObO
aãe
si xOa
ame ãe
agbe tso
A
life-saving
organization
has decided to train
yeana
hehe
Ghanatɔ
ewo.nya
to
train ten
Ghanaians.
me be
me be yeana hehe GhanatO ewo.
ten
Ghanaians.
The Nigerian government has taken
Nigeriadziãuãua
dziɖuɖua wO
wɔ afOãeãe
afɔɖeɖe sesẽwo
ɖe
Nigeria
sesẽwo ãe
The Nigerian
government
has
taken drastic
drastic
measures
against road
acci614
mɔdododzifɔkuwo ŋu.
mOdododzifOkuwo
measures against road accidents.
dents.
SrOã ãee fia be dOléle sesẽ aãe le fu ãem
Olu Jacob is suffering from a severe ailment,
Srɔ̃a ɖee fia be
sesẽ aɖe le fu ɖem Olu Jacob is suﬀering
from
a severe ailnadɔléle
Olu Jacob.
his wife
disclosed.
766
Olu Jacob.
wife disclosed.
Xexeame ƒe na
Lãmesẽ
HabObO ão lEta ãe
Thement,
Worldhis
Health
Organization (WHO) has
(WHO)
Xexeame
Lãmesẽ
ɖo lɛta
Ghana beƒewoado
goHabɔbɔ
ame alafa
ãekaɖe The World
sent aHealth
letter toOrganization
Ghana to meet
a hundred
hehexOxO.
forGhana
training
purposes.
has sent apeople
letter to
to meet
a
650
Ghana be hena
woado go
ame alafa ɖeka
Total size
hundred people for training purposes.
hena hehexɔxɔ.
Total sizeof articles from different African web sources.
4264
Note: Example of a collection

Note: Example of a collection of articles from diﬀerent African web sources.

3.2. Preprocessing and Word Embedding
In our preprocessing phase, all upper-case letters were changed to lower-case for uncased models and vice versa for cased models. We proceeded to clean the collected Ewe
texts (removing noises: hashtags, empty spaces, full stops, and punctuation from each

Size
794
358
1082
614
766
650
4264

Systems 2024, 12, 1

8 of 22

3.2. Preprocessing and Word Embedding
In our preprocessing phase, all upper-case letters were changed to lower-case for
uncased models and vice versa for cased models. We proceeded to clean the collected Ewe
texts (removing noises: hashtags, empty spaces, full stops, and punctuation from each Ewe
text, except for unique alphabetical letters, etc.) as indicated in [45]. We later tokenized
each sentence into words. In the Ewe language, words are typically separated by spaces.
However, considering the complexities of agglutinative languages like Ewe, which involve
words formed by multiple morphemes, Ewe, like many African languages, exhibits an
agglutinative feature where various morphemes are combined to form words. For example,
in the Ewe word “dzigbordi,” “dzi” is a prefix, “gbor” is the root, and “di” is a suffix.
Recognizing these morphemes is essential for accurate tokenization. This work explores the
SpaCy Python library for tokenizing the Ewe text. Then, we reviewed all tokenized words
to ensure proper tokenized words. Additionally, we performed a lemmatization process
after tokenization [30]. Lemmatization of the Ewe text typically requires a language-specific
lemmatization model or rules (build custom rules) since the popular NLP libraries do not
provide a pre-trained lemmatization model for the Ewe text as of the time of this study.
To this end, for lemmatizing the tokens generated with the dataset, we considered setting
a custom rule based on the linguistic characteristics of Ewe [30]. The rule set employed
was based on five Ewe tutors in Ghana to lemmatize ão, e, me, dzi, dzO, wo, a, mi, nO, and
vi since they represent most of the minor units of linguistic representation in the dataset.
A statistical summary of the proposed Ewe dataset is summarized in Table 2. The Ewe
dataset consists of about 52K tokens, and 43,849 tokens after lemmatization were recorded.
Table 2. Statistics of the Ewe news dataset.
Class

No. of Articles

No. of Sentences

No. of Tokens

No. of Tokens after
Lemmatization

Coronavirus
Political
Business
Local
Entertainment
Sports

794
358
1082
614
766
650

4596
1674
6338
4230
2880
5436

7734
5009
11,441
9273
6456
11,736

7121
4701
10,506
8513
5887
7121

Mean (µ)
Standard deviation (σ)

710.67
238.70

4192.33
1695.83

8608.16
2705.56

308.17
2028.05

Word Embedding
Word embedding is a technique used for feature learning and language modeling
in NLP. It is vital for any word or document that needs to be represented as a vector or
tensor. Several word embeddings have been explored for downstream tasks such as text
classification, topic modeling, or sentiment analysis.
In this study, we developed an embedding layer utilizing the word lexicon model
to extract features from the Ewe texts. These features were fed into each model as input
vectors, or tensors, to solve the classification problem. In TC tasks, words in sentences
carry significant semantic features for their appropriate classification. Hence, a sentence
is represented by a set of words. The sentence is measured as a sequence of words η. In
our setup, each word in the sentence was mapped to a multi-dimensional continuous
tensor. Assume that the word tensor ωi ∈ N m corresponds to ith in the sentence where m
represents the dimension of the word tensor. In a simple mathematical concatenation ⊕ of
the words η, the tensor matrix, W for the sentence of length is described as:
W = ( ω1 ⊕ ω2 ⊕ ω3 ⊕ . . . ⊕ ω n ) .

(1)

Systems 2024, 12, 1

9 of 22

3.3. Methodology
In this part, we first explain why the transformer-based models are chosen. Then,
we give a detailed description of each modified, pre-trained model. Finally, an exact
fine-tuning procedure is provided for each pre-trained model.
3.3.1. Reason for Choosing These Transformer-Based Models
Transformer-based models are newly introduced architectures created to solve the
sequence-to-sequence challenge in neural networks, including LSTM and RNN, for sequence modeling. These models from Hugging-Face [46] scripts include BERT (cased and
uncased version) [17], RoBERTa [38], DistilBERT (cased and uncased version) [39], DistilRoBERTa [39], and Decoding-Enhanced BERT with Disentangle Attention [47] (DeBERTa)
models. It is important to note that the choice of model depends on the specific requirements of the task, in our case, text classification, the available computational resources, and
the trade-offs between model size and performance. BERT [17] and its variants, including
DistilBERT [39], DistilRoBERTa, RoBERTa [38], and DeBERTa [47], have shown several merits over other pre-trained models in NLP tasks [1,24,48]. A key component in these models
is the engineered transformer mechanism. Transformers [49] have proven effective in
capturing long-range dependencies in sequences, making them suitable for tasks requiring
contextual understanding. With BERT, the model introduced bidirectional training, allowing it to consider both the left and right context in a sentence. This bidirectional approach
helps capture high semantic relationships between words. RoBERTa [38], on the other
hand, incorporates modifications to BERT’s training objectives, removing the Next Sentence Prediction (NSP) task and using dynamic masking. These changes lead to improved
robustness and better performance on text classification tasks. RoBERTa is also designed to
handle sentences and documents more effectively by training on longer sequences than
other pre-trained models. This improvement contributes to better performance on tasks
involving longer Ewe texts. DistilBERT and DistilRoBERTa are distillation-based models designed to be smaller and faster than their parent models (BERT and RoBERTa, respectively).
They achieve similar performance to the larger models but with reduced computational
requirements compared with other models. DistilBERT and DistilRoBERTa leverage parameter sharing and knowledge distillation techniques to compress the model while retaining
its performance. This makes them suitable for deployment in resource-constrained environments. DeBERTa [47] introduces enhancements to handle long sequences more effectively.
It incorporates ideas like disentangled and positional attention, improving the model’s
ability to capture relationships in lengthy text compared to models such as ALBERT [50]
and XLM-RoBERTa [51].
To our knowledge, no study fine-tuned these models for a low-resource Ewe text
classification. Therefore, this is the first comprehensive study to explore these models to
solve the classification problem associated with the Ewe language.
3.3.2. BERT Model
The BERT-based model [17] is designed to pre-train “deep-bidirectional representations” that can be fine-tuned for downstream tasks. BERT has achieved outstanding
performance on several HRLs [1,17], but it is yet to be deployed with the low-resourced
Ewe text. BERT is based on an attention mechanism that allows a network to give weight
to a set of tokens sequentially. This enables it to represent not just sequences but also the
relevance of each word’s weight inside a sequence relating to other sequences and the
sequence itself. This study formulates an attention mechanism as follows:
 p
0.5 




( XMη )
√
Attention( X, M, K ) = so f tmax
⊗ K,
(2)


dm



Systems 2024, 12, 1

10 of 22

where, dm is the critical matrix dimension. Note that the attention is a set of computational
matrices X, while M and K are the matrix’s key and value, respectively. We used our Ewe
news dataset to build a BERT WordPiece lexicon using the tokenizer library, making a total
of 57,769 tokens. During our setup, we followed all procedures in the novel BERT (basecased) model [19] requirement. Additionally, we took advantage of the smaller version of
BERT named “BERT-base-uncased” due to the nature and size of our dataset.
In this study, we set pre-trained as TRUE for both BERT-base-cased and BERT-baseuncased models with 12 layers, 768 hidden neurons per layer, and 12 attention heads
with an input of [CLS] T [SEP]C [SEP] N. By standard practice, 15% of the tokens in each
input vector are masked as Tmask and Cmask , which are randomly collected from T and C
for maximum masking. The goal is to determine the actual tokens that are masked out.
Mathematically, this is presented as:

∑

Loss MLM =

− log ρ( xi ),

(3)

xi ∈ Tmask ∪Cmask

where the probability of determining the actual token is ρ( xi ) in the right position ( xi ).
Most language models do not explicitly capture the semantic relationship between a
mathematical formula and its context. Like the NSP task in BERT, we utilized the pre-train
model for the binarized context correspondence prediction (CCP) task. Precisely, 50% of
context C in the pre-trained sample is changed with another context in the dataset. The
objective is to appropriately match the current input Ci with the corresponding context T.
This is formulated as follows:
LossCCP = [(−ξ log ρ − (1 − ξ )) ⊗ (log(1 − ρ))],
ξ=

n

1 i f C = Ci .
0 otherwise.

(4)
(5)

We used the rectified Adam optimizer (RAdam) for our BERT model with an initial
learning rate of 1e-4 and a batch size of 16.
3.3.3. DistilBERT Model
We explore a faster, cheaper, smaller, and lighter knowledge distillation model called
DistilBERT [39] with DistilBERT-base-cased and DistilBERT-base-uncased models, the
distilled version of BERT.
In this part, the model’s last four hidden layers are aggregated and fed to the classifier, as specified when implementing a BERT model for the downstream task. For this
reason, we employ our pre-trained standard DistilBERT-base-cased and DistilBERT-baseuncased models without whole-word masking as a teacher model and use its weights to
activate the layers of a different student model. We set both DistilBERT-base-cased and
DistilBERT-base-uncased models with the learning setup of the BERT [17] model but with
the Adam optimizer and a batch size of 16, which is significantly larger due to the nature
of DistilBERT [39].
3.3.4. RoBERTa and DistilRoBERTa Models
PLMs have significantly impacted performance accuracy, but a substantive comparison
has been challenging. Training on a low-resource dataset like the Ewe news dataset is
computationally expensive since its hyperparameters will significantly affect the final
result. Due to this challenge, developers enhanced the BERT model by adjusting its static
masking procedure to a dynamic masking procedure and naming it RoBERTa [38]. On the
other hand, DistilRoBERTa is a compressed version of RoBERTa that trains faster while
maintaining up to 95% of the original’s performance.
We utilized each model’s pre-trained transformers-based library from Hugging Face
in this part. We modified the RoBERTa and DistilRoBERTa models to solve the classification
problem. Specifically, we added an attention layer on top of the embedded, pre-trained

Systems 2024, 12, 1

11 of 22

model. Instead of using the tanh activation function in the original work, we used penalized
tanh, which works better for NLP tasks, along with a cross-entropy loss function. In our
classifying layer, we did not use softmax as in the original work but rather used argmax
directly on the outputs of the last layer to make the prediction. A tiny learning rate of 1e-4
was used for both models to solve the problem with a batch size of 8 and 16, respectively.
3.3.5. DeBERTa Model
DeBERTa [47] is an improved version of the RoBERTa [38] and BERT [17] models,
which is pre-trained with the mask language models’ objectives and fine-turned using the
adversarial setting. This method enhances its interpretability and robustness in adversarial
settings. DeBERTa [47] introduces an attention layer with decoupled components. Unlike transformers, which combine positional encoding with word content embedding to
construct the input representation, DeBERTa [47] encodes words and locations separately.
The attention results for each position are calculated using disentangled matrices and
depend precisely on the word’s content and relative position in the sentence. Additionally, the decoder is changed to accommodate absolute word positions when predicting a
masked token.
In our study, a token at position is presented in sequence with two vectors, Yi and Zi ,
displaying the content and relative position of the token at position α. Mathematically, the
four scores of the cross-attention between i and α are decomposed as:
n
on
o T  
 
 
 

Ai||α =
Yi , Zi||α · Yi , Zi||α
= Yi YαT + Yi ZαT||i + Zi||α YαT + Zi||α ZαT||i
,
(6)
where the attention weight of the Ewe text pair is computed as the sum of all four attention
scores using disentangled matrices on their positions and contents (i.e., content-to-content,
position-to-content, content-to-position, and position-to-position), respectively. We argue
that the attention weight of a word pair depends not only on content but also on their
relative positions, as experienced in the Ewe text, which can only be represented using both
the content-to-position and position-to-content terms. Since we emphasized the relative
positions of the Ewe text, the position-to-position in Equation (6) did not add any additional
parameters; hence, we did not include it in our implementation. The relative distance
between i and α is presented as:

f or i − α ≤ −k

0
ϕ(i, α) 2k − 1
(7)
f or i − α ≥ k


i − α + k others.
where the maximum relative distance is denoted as k, and ϕ(i, α) ∈ [0, 2k]. In addition to
the relative position, the disentangled self-attention is represented as:
YWq,C ,KC =YWk,C ,XC =YWX,C ,Qr = ZWq,r ,Kr = ZWk,r
T
C r
T
Ai,α =
QiC KαCT + QiC K CT
+ Kα Q ϕ(α,i )
ϕ(i,α)

QC = ∼

| {z }

( a) content−to −content

|

{z

}

( a) content−to − position

|

{z

 √ 
∼
.H0 = so f tmax A/ 3d XC ,

(8)

}

( a) position−to −content

where, KC , XC , and QC are the probable Ewe content vectors generated using the matrices WqC , WX,C ,
WkC ∈ Rd×d while the embedding vectors of all layers Z ∈ R2k×d , Qr , and Kr are probable relative
∼

position vectors of the Ewe content using matrices: Wq,r , Wk,r ∈ Rd×d . Furthermore, Ai,α is an element
∼

of the attention matrix A, representing the attention score from token i to α. QiC is the ith row of the
matrix QC and αth the row of KC is KαC . The ϕ(i, α)th row of Kr is K rϕ(i,α) . Finally, we scale >A by a
 √  −1
factor
3d
which is crucial for stabilizing large-scale PLMs during training [49].

3.3.6. Fine-Tuning
Training an extensive language model such as BERT on a small dataset can lead to overfitting
issues. Therefore, leveraging a pre-trained language model trained on a distinct dataset is advis-

Systems 2024, 12, 1

12 of 22

able [49]. In this study, we leverage the knowledge acquired during pre-training for each model,
allowing the model to adapt to our text classification task using the proposed Ewe news dataset.
We fine-tuned both the cased and uncased versions of our BERT models separately on the
proposed Ewe dataset using the RAdam optimizer. The initial learning rate was set to 1e-4 and the
batch size was 16. During this process, we adhered to a maximum sequence length of 128. We used
the Adam optimizer to finetune the DistilBERT cased and uncased models on the Ewe dataset, just
as with the BERT models. The learning rate was 1e-4 and the batch size was 32, even though the
model was smaller. During the fine-tuning stage, we realized that the generalization of both case and
uncased DistilBERT models was not satisfactory with the larger batch size; hence, we used a smaller
batch size, 16. For the RoBERTa and DistilRoBERTa models, we fine-tuned according to [40] and used
the argmax directly on the outputs of the last layer with a learning rate of 1e-4 and a batch size of 8.
For DeBERTa, we fine-tuned based on the exact hyperparameters described in the original study [47].
The validation and test accuracies were recorded for all experimental configurations, with each setup
using k-fold cross-validation, where k = 5.

4. Experiments and Analysis
This part explains the fine-tuned models’ evaluation metrics in detail, presents results, and
analyzes their implications in solving the semantic representation of the low-resource Ewe classification. Using our newly created Ewe news dataset, we also compute the area under the ROC (receiver
operating characteristic curve) (ROC-AUC) curve for each fine-tuned model.

4.1. Evaluation Metric
To solve the classification problem associated with the Ewe language, we set x to be the total
number of categories in the Ewe news dataset, where x = 6. Let ( TPµ ) represent True Positive and
False Positive be ( FPµ ) of the i − th class. Similarly, let True and False Negatives be ( TNµ /FNµ ) of
the i − th class, respectively. Finally, we adopt Accuracy, Precision, Macro-F1, and Hamming loss as
the evaluation criteria for measuring a model’s robustness and ability to properly comprehend and
represent the Ewe text semantically for a fair comparison. We describe each metric as follows:
Accuracy (Acc) and Loss: We define accuracy as the proportion or percentage of appropriately
classified samples in the overall sample as:
n

Accuracy =

n
∑ µ =1

∑µ=1 ( TPµ + TNµ )
.
(TPµ +TNµ + FPµ + FNµ )

(9)

While; Loss = 1-Accuracy.
Precision (Prec): This correctly classified positive samples in the overall samples predicted to
be positive for the i-th class as:
TPµ
Precision =
.
(10)
TPµ + FPµ
Recall (Rec): The fraction of positive samples that were correctly categorized out of all positive
samples for the i-th class as:
TPµ
.
(11)
Recall =
TPµ + FNµ
F1 Score (F1s): The cumulative sum of accuracy and recall for the i-th class is defined as:
F1s =

2( Prec × Rec)
.
Prec + Rec

(12)

F1-Macro: The mean value of F1 across all classes.
F1macro =

1 n
F1s.
n µ∑
=1

(13)

F1-Micro: The Micro F1 is a measurement that considers all labels’ total precision and recall. It
is defined as:
2( Prec × Rec)
F1micro =
.
(14)
Prec + Rec

Systems 2024, 12, 1

13 of 22

Hamming Loss (HL): The HL [52] scores declassified instance-label combinations in which a
relevant label is omitted, or an unrelated label is predicted. Thus, H : φ → 2y for distribution D.
Statistically, HL loss is denoted as:
HL =

1
E
[h(φ)∀Y ],
n (φ,Y )∼ D

(15)

where ∀ is a symmetric difference, n1 is to ensure a value between [0, 1]. Additionally, we create a
function using LabelBinarizer () to compute the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve
(ROC-AUC) score for the classification problem as described in [53].

4.2. Implementation Details
All experiments run on a single RTX 2080Ti GPU and are implemented with the PyTorch deep
learning framework. We set the learning rate to 1e-4 with a dropout of 0.5 using the Rectified
Adam optimizer (RAdam), otherwise as specified in the model description. All implementations are
conducted in k-fold cross-validation, where k = 5 with 50 epochs. In this study, our cross-fold is split
into two parts, i.e., four folds were used for training while one fold was used for testing. Additionally,
we use the cross-entropy loss function as our primary training loss function. The batch size is set to
16 and 8, respectively. During training, we configure pre-trained as accurate for each model.

4.3. Results and Discussion
Firstly, a visualization of each fine-tuned mode’s class feature separability components on
the proposed Ewe news dataset is presented (see Figure 4). Additionally, we evaluate each class’s
accuracy using each fine-tuned model (see Table 3). A comprehensive comparison is presented with
experimental results for each fine-tuned model (see Table 4). We also validate the performance of
these fine-tuned models with several learning rates (1e-2, 1e-3, 1e-4, 1e-5, 2e-3, and 2e-4) and batch
sizes 8 and 16 to select the optimum learning rate with a best-fit batch size.
Table 3. Accuracy score of each class.
Class

BERT-BasedCased

BERT-BasedUncased

RoBERTa

DistilRoBERTa

DistilBERTBased-Cased

DistilBERTBased-Uncased

DeBERTa

AVG

Business
Coronavirus
Entertainment
Local
Sports
Politics

99.07
98.73
97.54
97.39
97.67
100.00

97.22
96.84
98.36
92.16
100.00
100.00

97.22
100.00
96.72
92.16
98.45
100.00

94.44
100.00
94.26
96.08
98.45
100.00

95.37
98.73
98.36
97.39
100.00
100.00

96.30
96.20
100.00
97.39
100.00
100.00

100.00
100.00
96.72
90.85
96.90
93.55

97.09(5)
98.64(3)
97.42(4)
94.77(6)
98.78(2)
99.08(1)

Table 4. Classification performance of each fine-tuned transformer model on the Ewe news dataset.
Model

Accuracy

Precision

Recall

F1-Macro

F1-Micro

Average

Loss

BERT-based-cased
BERT-based-uncased
RoBERTa
DistilRoBERTa
DistilBERT-based-cased
DistilBERT-based-uncased
DeBERTa

0.972
0.964
0.959
0.960
0.963
0.968
0.961

0.969
0.962
0.957
0.959
0.962
0.964
0.958

0.970
0.961
0.949
0.960
0.961
0.966
0.959

0.972
0.963
0.953
0.961
0.962
0.967
0.961

0.968
0.960
0.956
0.958
0.964
0.965
0.957

0.970
0.962
0.955
0.960
0.962
0.966
0.960

0.021
0.037
0.049
0.039
0.033
0.023
0.031

4.3.1. Visualization of Class Feature Separability
Generally, DL networks provide complex features via cascading layer structures. In our study,
we visualized all the hidden features based on the six classes in the Ewe news dataset using the
modified fine-tuned models. This aims to analyze the separability of the Ewe word features and their
impact on these models.
We further extracted 128-D hidden feature vectors from each pre-trained model separately. Then,
we used the t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) to place them in a 2-D embedding
space. To enhance the visual appearance of all articles, we utilized the t-SNE tool to characterize each
embedded feature. All clusters were labeled with diverse colors (see Figure 4). The results for each

Systems 2024, 12, 1

14 of 22

Systems 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW

class are provided to evaluate the accuracy of the proposed dataset (see Table 3). The accuracy of
15 of 24
each class was ranked in a curly brace using the average performance of each fine-tuned model. In
this study, the politics, sports, and coronavirus classes were ranked first, second, and third, while the
entertainment, business, and local classes were ranked fourth, fifth, and sixth, respectively.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)
Figure
4. Feature
embeddings
at diﬀerent
depths
of classes.
(a) BERT-based-cased;
(b) (b)
BERT-basedFigure
4. Feature
embeddings
at different
depths
of classes.
(a) BERT-based-cased;
BERT-baseduncased; (c) DistilBERT-based-cased; (d) DistilBERT-based-uncased; (e) DistilRoBERTa; (f) RoBuncased; (c) DistilBERT-based-cased; (d) DistilBERT-based-uncased; (e) DistilRoBERTa; (f) RoBERTa;
ERTa; (g) DeBERTa.
(g) DeBERTa.
Table 3. Accuracy score of each class.
Class
Business

BERTBERT-BasedBased-Cased
Uncased
99.07
97.22

RoBDistilBERT- DistilBERT-BasedDistilRoBERTa
ERTa
Based-Cased
Uncased
97.22
94.44
95.37
96.30

DeBERTa

AVG

100.00

97.09(5)

Systems 2024, 12, 1

15 of 22

4.3.2. Models’ Performance Comparison
We compared each fine-tuned model in terms of the model’s best-fitting capability (lower loss)
with an improved generalization. As presented in Table 4, the BERT-cased model recorded the highest
classification performance of 0.972 and the lowest loss score of 0.021. The model was also superior in
precision, recall, and F1-macro, with corresponding scores of 0.969, 0.970, and 0.972, respectively.
In the case of the BERT-based-uncased model, there was a slight drop of 0.008 in terms of
accuracy compared with the BERT-based-cased and a high loss score of 0.037. Experimentally, we
realized that the Bert-base-uncased model recorded a few fluctuations in various folds, ultimately
affecting its classification performance. It, however, recorded a low precision of 0.962, a recall of
0.961, and an F1-macro of 0.963. Additionally, the recently introduced DeBERTa model performed
moderately with the low-resourced Ewe text compared with the RoBERTa model. DeBERTa recorded
a classification accuracy of 0.961 and a loss of 0.031. The newly introduced model recorded a precision
score of 0.958, and recall and F1-macro scores of 0.959 and 0.961, respectively. Based on these findings,
we concluded that the DeBERTa model best represents semantic features in the low-resourced Ewe
text. For the DistilBERT-base-cased model, a classification accuracy of 0.963 with a loss score of 0.033
was recorded.
As presented in Table 4, the model also recorded its precision, recall, and F1-macro scores as
0.962, 0.961, and 0.962, respectively. On the other hand, the DistilBERT-base-uncased model recorded
a classification accuracy of 0.968, a tiny loss score of 0.023, and a precision and a recall score of 0.964
and 0.966, respectively, with an F1-macro score of 0.967. An accuracy of 0.960 was recorded for
the DistilRoBERTa model, with a loss of 0.039. The RoBERTa model recorded 0.959 accuracy and a
0.049 loss.
Finally, we illustrated a confusion matrix for predicting exact text classes based on the features
generated from the proposed Ewe news dataset (see Figure 5). Figure 5b shows that four news
articles from the business, coronavirus, and entertainment classes were misclassified as local news.
Similarly, in Figure 5d (DistilBERT-base-uncased), four articles from local news were misclassified
as coronavirus news. This is because there is a semantic similarity between both class contexts. It
means the misclassified articles had parts like local news, which is why they were misclassified. In
Figure 5f (Roberta), 12 business news articles were misclassified as local news. In the same instance,
10 business news articles were misclassified as local news, as shown for DeBERTa (see Figure 5g). This
is because there is a semantic relationship between business news features and local news features.
From these misclassified examples, we conclude that business and local news share a few related
semantic features. From this experimental evidence, we can conclude that all the fine-tuned models
produce optimal predictive results. Due to the optimal performance exhibited by these models,
exploring different feature engineering may not affect the performance significantly (see Figure 6).
Furthermore, we computed the area under the curve of the receiver operating characteristics
(AUC-ROC) on the newly proposed Ewe news dataset (see Table 5). The experimental results from
Table 5 show that BERT-base-cased recorded a lower HL than the other fine-tuned models, showing its
ability to solve the classification problem more efficiently. This proves that the fine-tuned BERT-cased
model is more robust in representing the Ewe semantic features and can classify Ewe texts more
efficiently. Generally, the fine-tuned BERT-cased model outperformed all other compared models
regarding classification accuracy, performance, and loss scores. This indicates a much stronger word
representation than the Ewe text, demonstrating robustness. Additionally, the models’ high precision,
recall, and F1-macro scores prove their stability with the low-resourced Ewe text. Our fine-tuned
DeBERTa model’s performance accuracy was reduced by a small margin, indicating it can also solve
the classification problem associated with the Ewe language. To our knowledge, this is the first
study incorporating DeBERTa with the Ewe text. Hence, its word relationships significantly affected
learning the Ewe context. The BERT-based cased model was ranked first on the Ewe news dataset,
followed by the DistilBERT-uncased model. The BERT-uncased was ranked third, the DistilBERTcased was ranked fourth, the DistilRoBERTa was ranked fifth, and the DeBERTa and RoBERTa models
were ranked sixth and seventh, respectively.

Systems 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW

Systems 2024, 12, 1

17 of 24

0.967. An accuracy of 0.960 was recorded for the DistilRoBERTa model, with a loss of 0.039.
16 of 22
The RoBERTa model recorded 0.959 accuracy and a 0.049 loss.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)
Figure
exacttext
textclass.
class.(a)
(a)BERT-based-cased;
BERT-based-cased;
BERT-basedFigure5.5.Confusion
Confusionmatrix
matrix for
for predicting
predicting exact
(b)(b)
BERT-baseduncased;
(c)
DistilBERT-based-cased;
(d)
DistilBERT-based-uncased;
(e)
DistilRoBERTa;
(f) RoBuncased; (c) DistilBERT-based-cased; (d) DistilBERT-based-uncased; (e) DistilRoBERTa; (f) RoBERTa;
ERTa;
(g)
DeBERTa.
(g) DeBERTa.

(g)
Systems 2024, 12, 1

Figure 5. Confusion matrix for predicting exact text class. (a) BERT-based-cased; (b) BERT-baseduncased; (c) DistilBERT-based-cased; (d) DistilBERT-based-uncased; (e) DistilRoBERTa; (f) RoB- 17 of 22
ERTa; (g) DeBERTa.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)
Figure 6. Classification results of fine-tuned models at different epochs. (a) BERT-based-cased;
(b) BERT-based-uncased; (c) DistilBERT-based-cased; (d) DistilBERT-based-uncased; (e) DistilRoBERTa; (f) RoBERTa; (g) DeBERTa.
Table 5. ROC-AUC results on the Ewe news dataset.
Model

ROC-AUC

ROC-AUC Weight

HL

BERT-based-cased
BERT-based-uncased
RoBERTa
DistilRoBERTa
DistilBERT-based-cased
DistilBERT-based-uncased
DeBERTa

0.995
0.993
0.973
0.985
0.989
0.994
0.984

0.994
0.989
0.971
0.983
0.984
0.992
0.983

0.029
0.040
0.041
0.043
0.037
0.034
0.038

DistilRoBERTa
DistilBERT-based-cased
DistilBERT-based-uncased
DeBERTa

0.985
0.989
0.994
0.984

Systems 2024, 12, 1

0.983
0.984
0.992
0.983

0.04
0.03
0.03
0.03
18 of 22

4.3.3. Ablation Study

The performance of each fine-tuned model with learning rates 1e-2, 1e-3, 1e-4
2e-3,
4.3.3. Ablation Studyand 2e-4 and batch sizes 8 and 16 was evaluated. The goal was to determi
optimum
(best)
and most
eﬀective
learningrates
rate1e-2,
with1e-3,
a best-fit
batch
sizeand
for the pro
The performance
of each
fine-tuned
model
with learning
1e-4, 1e-5,
2e-3,
Ewe
dataset.
The
results
shown
in
Figure
7
indicate
that
the
choice
of
learning
rate
2e-4 and batch sizes 8 and 16 was evaluated. The goal was to determine the optimum (best) and most
icantly
aﬀects
the batch
model’s
performance.
effective learning rate
with
a best-fit
size for the
proposed Ewe dataset. The results shown in
Figure 7 indicate that the choice of learning rate significantly affects the model’s performance.

Systems 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW

20 of 24

Figure 7. Eﬀects of additional learning rates. (a) Batch size 8; (b) Batch size 16.

In Figure 7a, we realized that fine-tuning RoBERTa and DistilRoBERTa converged
(a) classification accuracy using batch size 8.(b)
well, achieving improved
However, other finetuned models could not converge well with a batch size of 8. In Figure 7b, we increased
Figure 7. Effects of additional learning rates. (a) Batch size 8; (b) Batch size 16.
the
batch size to 16 to confirm if there was a significant improvement in the model’s performance.
Most
models
recorded
an enhanced
generalization
when
batch
In Figure
7a, fine-tuned
we realized that
fine-tuning
RoBERTa
and DistilRoBERTa
converged
well,the
achieving
size
was
set
to
16.
A
learning
rate
of
1e-2
was
relatively
high
for
fine-tuning
BERT-based,
improved classification accuracy using batch size 8. However, other fine-tuned models could not
RoBERTa,well with a
DistilBERT-based,
andIn Figure
DeBERTa
models.
Thistheshows
thattothe
model
training
converge
batch size of 8.
7b, we
increased
batch size
16 to
confirm if
there
was
a
significant
improvement
performance.
Most a
fine-tuned
modelsof 1e-3
recorded
an
diverges
at
1e-2, resulting
inin the
lowermodel’s
accuracy.
Additionally,
learning rate
was
enhanced
generalization
when
the
batch
size
was
set
to
16.
A
learning
rate
of
1e-2
was
relatively
lower and improved the model’s performance slightly compared to 1e-2, but it was still
high for fine-tuning
BERT-based,
DistilBERT-based,
and DeBERTa
models.
This shows
relatively
low. However,
for theRoBERTa,
1e-4 learning
rate, the results
significantly
improved
the
that
the
model
training
diverges
at
1e-2,
resulting
in
lower
accuracy.
Additionally,
a
learning
rate
fine-tuning model’s accuracy, except for the RoBERTa and DistilRoBERTa models. With
of 1e-3 was lower and improved the model’s performance slightly compared to 1e-2, but it was still
the proposed Ewe dataset, this is an optimal learning rate for fine-tuning the BERT, Distilrelatively low. However, for the 1e-4 learning rate, the results significantly improved the fine-tuning
BERT-based,
and DeBERTa models that have converged well, achieving high accuracy.
model’s accuracy, except for the RoBERTa and DistilRoBERTa models. With the proposed Ewe dataset,
However,
the learning
slightly
higher the
thanBERT,
1e–4 but still
within the
range
for
this
is an if
optimal
learning is
rate for
fine-tuning
DistilBERT-based,
andtypical
DeBERTa
models
fine-tuning,
the
accuracy
decenthigh
but not
as high as
withif the
1e-4.learning is
Experimentally,
learning
that
have
converged
well, is
achieving
accuracy.
However,
slightly a
higher
than
rate
1e–6
relatively
low and,
shown
in both
sizesis (see
Figure
7),as
the
accuracy
1e–4of
but
still is
within
the typical
rangeasfor
fine-tuning,
thebatch
accuracy
decent
but not
high as
with
1e-4.
Experimentally,
learning
of time
1e–6 is
relatively
as for
shown in
both rate
batch 2e-3,
sizes we
(see
is
good but
trainingatakes
a rate
longer
(see
Figurelow
8). and,
Finally,
learning
Figure 7),
theit is
accuracy
good but
training
takes a longer
time (see
Figure
8). Finally,
for in
learning
rate
realize
that
high,iswhich
leads
to rapid
divergence
during
training,
resulting
lower
2e-3,
we
realize
that
it
is
high,
which
leads
to
rapid
divergence
during
training,
resulting
in
lower
accuracy, and 2e-4 is relatively low and might be suitable for fine-tuning.
accuracy, and 2e-4 is relatively low and might be suitable for fine-tuning.

Figure 8. Training time for each fine-tuning model.
Figure 8. Training time for each fine-tuning model.

Learning rates are crucial in fine-tuning the BERT-based, RoBERTa, DistilBERTbased, and DeBERTa models. Our validations found that 1e-4 was the best and most accurate learning rate for fine-tuning the BERT-based, RoBERTa, DistilBERT-based, and

Systems 2024, 12, 1

19 of 22

Learning rates are crucial in fine-tuning the BERT-based, RoBERTa, DistilBERT-based, and
DeBERTa models. Our validations found that 1e-4 was the best and most accurate learning rate for
fine-tuning the BERT-based, RoBERTa, DistilBERT-based, and DeBERTa models for the proposed
Ewe dataset. However, lower learning rates (1e-5 and 1e-6) and higher learning rates (1e-2 and 2e-3)
appeared less optimal, resulting in lower accuracy or divergence.

5. Conclusions
Recent developments in NLP studies and applications have barely considered the Ewe language.
The Ewe language is one of Africa’s widely spoken languages yet it is extremely low-resourced, with
a complex “unique” structure, poorly curated data, unavailable NLP statistical literature, and no
publicly available datasets.
This study developed and preprocessed an Ewe dataset to solve the classification problem
associated with the language. The study leveraged recent word embedding techniques to build an
Ewe-based word embedding. Additionally, we provided baseline results using seven fine-tuned
pre-trained models and assessed their stability and robustness in representing the exact semantics
of the low-resourced Ewe text. The findings in this current study demonstrated that fine-tuned
BERT-based cases were superior and best comprehended the Ewe context semantically compared
with other models. In our experiment, the fine-tuned DeBERTa model performed averagely, showing
its capability to efficiently capture long-range dependencies of the Ewe text. This study is positioned
to provide the necessary resources and gain future research opportunities in the DL field. To this end,
the new dataset and word embedding contribute to the existing literature on Ewe text processing.
Researchers seeking to derive insights or patterns from the dataset will obtain more robust and reliable
results using the dataset. The dataset becomes a valuable resource for researchers and developers
aiming to derive meaningful insights and build robust models in the context of the Ewe language.
In our future study, we plan to report on other embeddings and transformer-based and hybrid
deep learning techniques like CBOW, FastText, GloVe, XLNET, Alberta, multi-channel CNN with
Attention, etc. Furthermore, we intend to address multilingual issues in LRLs such as Fón, Twi,
Arabic, and Gbe by capitalizing on linguistic similarities and developing more robust learning models.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, methodology, V.K.A.; software, methodology, S.B.Y.; validation, S.B.Y. and N.A.K.; formal analysis, C.C.A.; investigation, C.C.U. and C.C.A.; resources,
M.A.H., N.A.S., and M.M.J.; visualization, M.A.H. and N.A.K.; data curation, V.K.A. and C.C.A.;
writing—original draft, V.K.A.; writing—review and editing, N.A.S., M.M.J. and M.A.A.-a.; supervision, W.C. and M.A.A.-a.; project administration, C.C.U. and N.A.K.; funding acquisition, M.A.A.-a.,
M.M.J. and N.A.S. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University Researchers
Supporting Project number (PNURSP2023R104), Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Data Availability Statement: The Ewe dataset, along with the PyTorch code we utilized in our
experiment is currently not accessible to the general public. However, it will be made available
through this link once the study is published: https://github.com/VictorAgbesi/Ewe-News-Dataset.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to express their grateful to Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University Researchers Supporting Project number (PNURSP2023R104), Princess Nourah bint
Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. This work was supported by the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (MSIT) (No. RS-2022-00166402
and RS-2023-00256517).
Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose.
The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare that are relevant to the contents of this article.

Notes
1

http://qwone.com/~jason/20Newsgroups/ (accessed on 11 November 2021)

2

https://paperswithcode.com/dataset/reuters-21578

3

https://paperswithcode.com/dataset/rcv1

4

https://ghananewsonline.com.gh/ (accessed on 20 October 2021)

5

https://www.voaafrica.com/ (accessed on 17 January 2022)

Systems 2024, 12, 1

6

https://www.togofirst.com/en (accessed on 19 January 2022)

7

https://punchng.com/ (accessed on 16 January 2022)

8

https://www.bbc.com/news/world/africa (accessed between 11 January to February 23 2022)

9

https://www.myjoyonline.com/ (accessed between 11 December 2021 to 30 January 2022)

10

https://citinewsroom.com/ (accessed on 25 February 2022)

11

beautifulsoup4·PyPI

20 of 22

References
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.
6.
7.

8.
9.

10.
11.
12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.
19.
20.
21.

Wang, Z.; Wang, L.; Huang, C.; Sun, S.; Luo, X. BERT-based chinese text classification for emergency management with a novel
loss function. Appl. Intell. 2023, 53, 10417–10428. [CrossRef]
Muñoz, S.; Iglesias, C.A. A text classification approach to detect psychological stress combining a lexicon-based feature framework
with distributional representations. Inf. Process. Manag. 2022, 59, 103011. [CrossRef]
Borjali, A.; Magnéli, M.; Shin, D.; Malchau, H.; Muratoglu, O.K.; Varadarajan, K.M. Natural language processing with deep
learning for medical adverse event detection from free-text medical narratives: A case study of detecting total hip replacement
dislocation. Comput. Biol. Med. 2021, 129, 104140. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Masood, K.; Khan, M.A.; Saeed, U.; Al Ghamdi, M.A.; Asif, M.; Arfan, M. Semantic Analysis to Identify Students’ Feedback.
Comput. J. 2022, 65, 918–925. [CrossRef]
Dogra, V.; Alharithi, F.S.; Álvarez, R.M.; Singh, A.; Qahtani, A.M. NLP-Based Application for Analyzing Private and Public Banks
Stocks Reaction to News Events in the Indian Stock Exchange. Systems 2022, 10, 233. [CrossRef]
Abdelhady, N.; Elsemman, I.E.; Farghally, M.F.; Soliman, T.H.A. Developing Analytical Tools for Arabic Sentiment Analysis of
COVID-19 Data. Algorithms 2023, 16, 318. [CrossRef]
Hayashi, T.; Yoshimura, T.; Inuzuka, M.; Kuroyanagi, I.; Segawa, O. Spontaneous Speech Summarization: Transformers All The
Way Through. In Proceedings of the European Signal Processing Conference, Dublin, Ireland, 23–27 August 2021; pp. 456–460.
[CrossRef]
Palanivinayagam, A.; El-Bayeh, C.Z.; Damaševičius, R. Twenty Years of Machine-Learning-Based Text Classification: A Systematic
Review. Algorithms 2023, 16, 236. [CrossRef]
Agbesi, V.K.; Chen, W.; Gizaw, S.M.; Ukwuoma, C.C.; Ameneshewa, A.S.; Ejiyi, C.J. Attention Based BiGRU-2DCNN with
Hunger Game Search Technique for Low-Resource Document-Level Sentiment Classification. In ACM International Conference
Proceeding Series; 2023; pp. 48–54. [CrossRef]
Li, Q.; Peng, H.; Li, J.; Xia, C.; Yang, R.; Sun, L.; Yu, P.S.; He, L. A Survey on Text Classification: From Traditional to Deep Learning.
ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. 2022, 13, 1–41. [CrossRef]
Richardson, F.; Reynolds, D.; Dehak, N. Deep neural network approaches to speaker and language recognition. IEEE Signal
Process. Lett. 2015, 22, 1671–1675. [CrossRef]
Guggilla, C. Discrimination between Similar Languages, Varieties and Dialects using {CNN}- and {LSTM}-based Deep Neural
Networks. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on {NLP} for Similar Languages, Varieties and Dialects ({V}ar{D}ial3), Osaka,
Japan; 2016; pp. 185–4824.
Agbesi, V.K.; Chen, W.; Odame, E.; Browne, J.A. Efficient Adaptive Convolutional Model Based on Label Embedding for Text
Classification Using Low Resource Languages. In Proceedings of the 2023 7th International Conference on Intelligent Systems,
Metaheuristics & Swarm Intelligence, Virtual, 23–24 April 2023; pp. 144–151. [CrossRef]
Cho, K.; van Merriënboer, B.; Bahdanau, D.; Bengio, Y. On the properties of neural machine translation: Encoder–decoder
approaches. In Proceedings of the SSST 2014-8th Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Translation, Doha,
Qatar, 25 October 2014; pp. 103–111. [CrossRef]
Howard, J.; Ruder, S. Universal language model fine-tuning for text classification. In Proceedings of the ACL 2018-56th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Proceedings of the Conference (Long Papers), Melbourne, Australia,
15–20 July 2018; pp. 328–339. [CrossRef]
Radford, A. Improving Language Understanding by Generative Pre-Training. Homol. Homotopy Appl. 2007, 9, 399–438.
Devlin, J.; Chang, M.W.; Lee, K.; Toutanova, K. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.
In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2019-2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies-Proceedings of the Conference, Minneapolis, MN, USA, 2–7 June 2019; pp. 4171–4186.
Nassiri, K.; Akhloufi, M. Transformer models used for text-based question answering systems. Appl. Intell. 2023, 53, 10602–10635.
[CrossRef]
Cruz, J.C.B.; Cheng, C. Establishing Baselines for Text Classification in Low-Resource Languages. arXiv 2020, arXiv:2005.02068.
Alzanin, S.M.; Azmi, A.M.; Aboalsamh, H.A. Short text classification for Arabic social media tweets. J. King Saud Univ.-Comput.
Inf. Sci. 2022, 34, 6595–6604. [CrossRef]
Chen, X.; Cong, P.; Lv, S. A Long-Text Classification Method of Chinese News Based on BERT and CNN. IEEE Access 2022, 10,
34046–34057. [CrossRef]

Systems 2024, 12, 1

22.

23.
24.

25.
26.

27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.

38.
39.
40.
41.

42.
43.
44.
45.
46.

47.

21 of 22

Islam, K.I.; Islam, M.S.; Amin, M.R. Sentiment analysis in Bengali via transfer learning using multi-lingual BERT. In Proceedings of the ICCIT 2020-23rd International Conference on Computer and Information Technology, Proceedings, Virtual,
19–21 December 2020. [CrossRef]
Alkhurayyif, Y.; Sait, A.R.W. A comprehensive survey of techniques for developing an Arabic question answering system. PeerJ
Comput. Sci. 2023, 9, e1413. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cunha, W.; Mangaravite, V.; Gomes, C.; Canuto, S.; Resende, E.; Nascimento, C.; Viegas, F.; França, C.; Martins, W.S.; Almeida, J.M.;
et al. On the cost-effectiveness of neural and non-neural approaches and representations for text classification: A comprehensive
comparative study. Inf. Process. Manag. 2021, 58, 102481. [CrossRef]
Kim, J.; Jang, S.; Park, E.; Choi, S. Text classification using capsules. Neurocomputing 2020, 376, 214–221. [CrossRef]
Agbesi, V.K.; Wenyu, C.; Kuadey, N.A.; Maale, G.T. Multi-Topic Categorization in a Low-Resource Ewe Language: A Modern
Transformer Approach. In Proceedings of the 2022 7th International Conference on Computer and Communication Systems
(ICCCS), Wuhan, China, 22–25 April 2022; pp. 42–45.
Azunre, P.; Osei, S.; Addo, S.; Adu-Gyamfi, L.A.; Moore, S.; Adabankah, B.; Opoku, B.; Asare-Nyarko, C.; Nyarko, S.; Amoaba, C.;
et al. NLP for Ghanaian Languages. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2103.15475.
Marivate, V.; Sefara, T.; Chabalala, V.; Makhaya, K.; Mokgonyane, T.; Mokoena, R.; Modupe, A. Investigating an approach for low
resource language dataset creation, curation and classification: Setswana and Sepedi. arXiv 2020, arXiv:2003.04986.
Cruz, J.C.B.; Cheng, C. Evaluating Language Model Finetuning Techniques for Low-resource Languages. arXiv 2019,
arXiv:1907.00409. [CrossRef]
Asim, M.N.; Ghani, M.U.; Ibrahim, M.A.; Mahmood, W.; Dengel, A.; Ahmed, S. Benchmarking performance of machine and deep
learning-based methodologies for Urdu text document classification. Neural Comput. Appl. 2021, 33, 5437–5469. [CrossRef]
Kanan, T.; Hawashin, B.; Alzubi, S.; Almaita, E.; Alkhatib, A.; Maria, K.A.; Elbes, M. Improving Arabic Text Classification Using
P-Stemmer. Recent Adv. Comput. Sci. Commun. 2020, 15, 404–411. [CrossRef]
Elnahas, A.; Elfishawy, N.; Nour, M.; Tolba, M. Machine Learning and Feature Selection Approaches for Categorizing Arabic Text:
Analysis, Comparison, and Proposal. Egypt. J. Lang. Eng. 2020, 7, 1–19. [CrossRef]
Vinh, T.N.P.; Kha, H.H. Vietnamese News Articles Classification Using Neural Networks. J. Adv. Inf. Technol. 2021, 12, 363–369.
[CrossRef]
Galal, M.; Madbouly, M.M.; El-Zoghby, A. Classifying Arabic text using deep learning. J. Theor. Appl. Inf. Technol. 2019, 97,
3412–3422.
Elnagar, A.; Al-Debsi, R.; Einea, O. Arabic text classification using deep learning models. Inf. Process. Manag. 2020, 57, 102121.
[CrossRef]
Liu, X.; Zhou, G.; Kong, M.; Yin, Z.; Li, X.; Yin, L.; Zheng, W. Developing Multi-Labelled Corpus of Twitter Short Texts: A
Semi-Automatic Method. Systems 2023, 11, 390. [CrossRef]
Adjeisah, M.; Liu, G.; Nortey, R.N.; Song, J.; Lamptey, K.O.; Frimpong, F.N. Twi corpus: A massively Twi-to-handful languages
parallel bible corpus. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE Intl Conf on Parallel & Distributed Processing with Applications, Big Data
& Cloud Computing, Sustainable Computing & Communications, Social Computing & Networking, Exeter, UK, 17–19 December
2020; pp. 1043–1049. [CrossRef]
Liu, Y.; Ott, M.; Goyal, N.; Du, J.; Joshi, M.; Chen, D.; Levy, O.; Lewis, M.; Zettlemoyer, L.; Stoyanov, V. RoBERTa: A Robustly
Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1907.11692.
Sanh, V.; Debut, L.; Chaumond, J.; Wolf, T. DistilBERT, a distilled version of BERT: Smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv 2019,
arXiv:1910.01108.
Yang, Z.; Dai, Z.; Yang, Y.; Carbonell, J.; Salakhutdinov, R.; Le, Q.V. XLNet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language
understanding. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2019, 2019, 5753–5763.
Mohammad, S.M.; Bravo-Marquez, F.; Salameh, M.; Kiritchenko, S. SemEval-2018 Task 1: Affect in Tweets. In Proceedings of
the NAACL HLT 2018-International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, SemEval 2018-Proceedings of the 12th Workshop, New
Orleans, LA, USA, 5–6 June 2018; pp. 1–17. [CrossRef]
Kuriyozov, E.; Salaev, U.; Matlatipov, S.; Matlatipov, G. Text classification dataset and analysis for Uzbek language. arXiv 2023,
arXiv:2302.14494.
Javed, T.A.; Shahzad, W.; Arshad, U. Hierarchical Text Classification of Urdu News using Deep Neural Network. arXiv 2021,
arXiv:2107.03141.
Ghafoor, A.; Imran, A.S.; Daudpota, S.M.; Kastrati, Z.; Batra, R.; Wani, M.A. The Impact of Translating Resource-Rich Datasets to
Low-Resource Languages through Multi-Lingual Text Processing. IEEE Access 2021, 9, 124478–124490. [CrossRef]
Gan, C.; Feng, Q.; Zhang, Z. Scalable multi-channel dilated CNN–BiLSTM model with attention mechanism for Chinese textual
sentiment analysis. Futur. Gener. Comput. Syst. 2021, 118, 297–309. [CrossRef]
Wolf, T.; Debut, L.; Sanh, V.; Chaumond, J.; Delangue, C.; Moi, A.; Cistac, P.; Rault, T.; Louf, R.; Funtowicz, M.; et al. Transformers:
State-of-the-Art Natural Language Processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing: System Demonstrations, Online, 16–20 November 2020; pp. 38–45. [CrossRef]
He, P.; Liu, X.; Gao, J.; Chen, W. DeBERTa: Decoding-enhanced BERT with Disentangled Attention. arXiv 2020, arXiv:2006.03654.

Systems 2024, 12, 1

48.

49.
50.
51.

52.
53.

22 of 22

Sun, C.; Huang, L.; Qiu, X. Utilizing BERT for aspect-based sentiment analysis via constructing auxiliary sentence. In Proceedings
of the NAACL HLT 2019-2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies-Proceedings of the Conference, Minneapolis, MN, USA, 2–7 June 2019; pp. 380–385.
Vaswani, A.; Shazeer, N.; Parmar, N.; Uszkoreit, J.; Jones, L.; Gomez, A.N.; Kaiser, Ł.; Polosukhin, I. Attention is all you need. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2017, 30, 5999–6009.
Lan, Z.; Chen, M.; Goodman, S.; Gimpel, K.; Sharma, P.; Soricut, R. ALBERT: A Lite BERT for Self-supervised Learning of
Language Representations. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1909.11942.
Conneau, A.; Khandelwal, K.; Goyal, N.; Chaudhary, V.; Wenzek, G.; Guzmán, F.; Grave, E.; Ott, M.; Zettlemoyer, L.; Stoyanov,
V. Unsupervised cross-lingual representation learning at scale. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, Online, 5–10 July 2020; pp. 8440–8451. [CrossRef]
Schapire, R.E.; Singer, Y. Improved boosting algorithms using confidence-rated predictions. Mach. Learn. 1999, 37, 297–336.
[CrossRef]
Hand, D.J.; Till, R.J. A Simple Generalisation of the Area Under the ROC Curve for Multiple Class Classification Problems. Mach.
Learn. 2001, 45, 171–186. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

