Journal of Business Ethics (2022) 180:455–479
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-021-04878-1

ORIGINAL PAPER

Modern Slavery Disclosure Regulation and Global Supply Chains:
Insights from Stakeholder Narratives on the UK Modern Slavery Act
Muhammad Azizul Islam1 · Chris J. Van Staden2
Received: 9 September 2020 / Accepted: 17 June 2021 / Published online: 6 July 2021
© The Author(s) 2021

Abstract
The purpose of this article is to problematise a particular social transparency and disclosure regulation in the UK, that transcend national boundaries in order to control (modern) slavery in supply chains operating in the developing world. Drawing
on notions from the regulatory and sociology literature, i.e. transparency and normativity, and by interviewing anti-slavery
activists and experts, this study explores the limitations of the disclosure and transparency requirements of the UK Modern
Slavery Act and, more specifically, how anti-slavery activists experience and interpret the new regulations and the regulators’ implementation of the regulation. This research found limited confidence among anti-slavery activists regarding the
Act’s call for transparency in relation to the elimination of slavery from global supply chains. The research also found that
the limits of the transparency provisions within the Act appear to hinder the attainment of normativity. This study provides
new and unique insights into the critical role that social activists play in exposing the lack of corporate transparency and
failures of responsibility to protect workers within global supply chains.
Keywords Developing nations · Supply chains · UK Modern Slavery Act 2015 · Transparency · Normativity · Disclosures ·
Anti-slavery activists · Regulation · Societal stakeholders

Introduction
Over the past two decades, stakeholder concerns and ubiquitous public pressures have led to evolving forms of social
and environmental disclosure and transparency regulations
in different countries. This has attracted a growing body of
research on the effect of social and environmental disclosure regulations on corporate disclosure and transparency
practices (see, for example, Islam & Van Staden, 2018;
Birkey et al., 2018; Bebbington et al., 2012; Blacconiere
& Patten, 1994; Blacconiere & Northcut, 1997; Chauvey
et al., 2015; Larrinaga et al., 2002). Prior research mainly
analysed disclosures (in annual reports, CSR/sustainability
reports and websites) in response to regulation mandating
disclosure.1We extend this body of research by focussing on
a new and important piece of regulation, the UK Modern
* Muhammad Azizul Islam
azizul.islam@abdn.ac.uk
1

Accounting Discipline, Business School, University
of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK

2

Department of Accounting, AUT Business School, Auckland
University of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand

Slavery Act of 2015, and stakeholder narratives on its success or limitations in achieving transparent modern slavery
disclosures and attaining normativity (i.e. being regarded
as good and desirable). Identifying and documenting critical issues in regulation enacted to address a social problem
like modern slavery is important in order to improve future
regulatory direction/s to eliminate unethical practices like
modern slavery from supply chains and society.
Modern slavery is an unethical practice (ILO and Walk
Free Foundation, 2017; Blitz & Simic, 2019) and its pervasive presence in global supply chains has attracted global
criticism (Ansett & Hantover, 2013; Arnold & Hewison,
2005; Barrientos & Smith, 2007; Hughes et al., 2007;
Kasperkevic, 2016; Kelly, 2014). Major disasters, such
as the Rana Plaza collapse in 2013 that killed more than
1100 workers in factories in Bangladesh that produced garments for western retailers, are indicative of weak moral and
ethical standards applied by global retailers in their supply
chains (Islam et al., 2021). This has led to new forms of
regulation (such as the UK Modern Slavery Act of 2015; the
1

In particular, scholars have mainly focussed on the impact of particular regulations on corporate disclosures, without necessarily connecting ‘disclosure’ with ‘transparency’.
Vol.:(0123456789)
1
3

456

US Dodd-Frank Act’s conflict mineral reporting rules, the
California Transparency in Supply Chains Act, and the Australian Modern Slavery Act of 2018) that attracted significant academic and social activist attention (Roshitsh, 2021;
Sobik, 2020; Rogerson et al., 2020; Hansard, 2019; LeBaron
& Rühmkorf, 2019; Blitz & Simic, 2019; Stevenson & Cole,
2018; Christ & Burritt, 2018; Birkey et al., 2018; Islam &
Van Staden, 2018; The Guardian, 2015; New, 2015; Crane,
2013; Gold et al., 2015). In relation to the UK Modern Slavery Act, while the Act is heralded to create transparency in
relation to factory working conditions within global supply
chains, there are concerns among academics and anti-slavery
activists about the Act’s limitations and resulting effectiveness (The Guardian, 2015; Hansard, 2019; LeBaron & Rühmkorf, 2019; Stevenson & Cole, 2018).
Drawing on notions of supply chain transparency (EgelsZandén et al., 2015; Gold & Heikkurinen, 2018) and regulatory normativity (Ewick & Silbey, 2003; Gray & Silbey,
2014) and the literature on counter-accounts/narratives
(Islam et al., 2021; Semeen & Islam, 2021; Neu et al., 2020;
Lehman et al., 2016; Vinnari and Laine 2017; Gallhofer
et al., 2006), we use interviews and publicly available reports
and documents to provide an insight into the limitations of
the UK Modern Slavery Act. Previous research examined the
normativity of social and environmental disclosure regulations by documenting the extent of corporate disclosure in
compliance with the regulations (see, for example, Birkey
et al., 2018; Chauvey et al., 2015). Our focus differs from
the previous research in that we draw on the sociology literature on normativity (Ewick & Silbey, 2003; Gray & Silbey,
2014) to examine the content and quality of the UK Modern
Slavery Act rather than focussing on the Act’s impact on
corporate disclosures. We do this by obtaining stakeholder
views and narratives on the content and quality of the Act
to assess the achievement of transparency regarding modern slavery in global supply chains and the attainment of
normativity for the Act within the public domain. By focussing on the views of anti-slavery activists and experts, we
problematise a particular social transparency and disclosure
regulation in the UK, that transcend national boundaries in
order to control (modern) slavery in supply chains operating
in the developing world. Our focus on anti-slavery activists
is very pertinent, since anti-slavery activists not only played
an important role in bringing about the UK Modern Slavery
Act of 2015, they were also responsible for the inclusion of
Section 54 on transparency to the legislation, as we discuss
in the next part. They also represent society, which is arguable the most impacted by modern slavery as they can be the
victims of this practice. Their views on whether the Act did,
in fact, achieve its transparency aim and attained normativity
are therefore topical and important.
We find that the interviewees expressed concerns (or
reservations) about the Act achieving transparency, for

13

M. A. Islam, C. J. Van Staden

respecting the public interest, and for attaining normativity.
Based on the notions of normativity (Ewick & Silbey, 2003;
Gray & Silbey, 2014) and supply chain transparency (EgelsZandén et al., 2015; Gold & Heikkurinen, 2018), we find
that while Act’s minimum disclosure provisions did not lead
to the achievement of transparency, this may also hamper the
Act’s normativity. Improved transparency and normativity
could result from the roles anti-slavery campaign groups can
play through the surveillance of corporate compliance with
the Act and their ability to trace the source of manufacturing within supply chains. Our study provides new insights
into the critical role of anti-slavery activists and NGOs in
understanding the limitations of a particular disclosure regulation to create transparency and attain normativity, as well
as the roles these activists could play in holding regulators
and companies responsible for their modern slavery-related
unethical practices in global supply chains. We contribute to the interdisciplinary literature on transparency and
regulatory normativity by highlighting anti-slavery activists’ critical evaluations of a new transparency and disclosure regulation with regards to the elimination of modern
slavery within global supply chains. We also contribute to
the counter-account/narrative literature (see, for example,
Semeen & Islam, 2021; Islam et al., 2018, 2021) that shows
that NGOs, activists and social movement organisations are
crucial actors in exposing the lack of corporate transparency
and accountability, and failures of responsibility to protect
workers within the global supply chains.
This paper is organised as follows. The Sect. “The UK
Modern Slavery Act of 2015 and its Provisions for Global
Supply Chains” provides a background for the UK Modern Slavery Act. The Sect. “Transparency and Normativity” describes the theoretical framework of this research.
The Sect. “Research methods” explains the research methods, while the Sect. “Findings and analysis” sets out the
findings and the analysis of the interviews conducted. The
Sect. “Conclusion” provides a conclusion.

The UK Modern Slavery Act of 2015 and its
Provisions for Global Supply Chains
Historically, slavery meant owning persons as legal property
and principles of property law were applied to human beings
(Allain, 2017). This meant that people were bought and sold
as their owners saw fit and were made to work hard under
often inhumane conditions. Although we do not see much
of this form of slavery nowadays, different forms of slavery
have emerged with globalisation. As a broad term, modern slavery encompasses unethical practices and may take
many forms, among them unpaid labour, human trafficking, child or forced labour, and forced marriages. In 2016, it
was estimated that over 40.3 million people worldwide were

Modern Slavery Disclosure Regulation and Global Supply Chains: Insights from Stakeholder…

enmeshed in some form of modern slavery, that is, there
were 5.4 victims of modern slavery for every 1000 people
in the world (ILO and Walk Free Foundation, 2017). In the
United Kingdom, on any given day in 2016, 136,000 people
lived in modern slavery conditions, that is, 2.1 victims for
every 1000 people in the country (The Global Slavery Index,
2018). However, forced labour is the main form of modern
slavery within global supply chains and 25 million people
are in forced labour worldwide (ILO and Walk Free Foundation, 2017). With regards to global supply chains, there is
a ubiquitous public and academic discourse suggesting that
the use of forced labour facilitates lower labour costs and
boosts the revenues of multinational retailers and suppliers
(Chalmers, 2013; FEE, 2017; Oxfam, 2018) and this, in turn,
raise problematic issues regarding the ethical standing of
both retailers and suppliers (Islam et al., 2021).2
Modern slavery issues are gaining significant public and
academic attention because high-profile human rights crises are emerging in global supply chains (Christ & Burritt,
2018; Crane, 2013; Gadd & Broad, 2018; Gold et al., 2015;
Islam et al., 2018, 2021; Landau & Marshall, 2018; Mehra
& Shay, 2016; New, 2015; Turner, 2016), for example, the
2013 Rana Plaza disaster in Bangladesh, and because new
forms of modern slavery regulation are evolving to regulate
MNCs and their suppliers in the developing world. Transparency and disclosure regulations such as the California
Transparency in Supply Chains Act of 2010 (CTSCA), the
US Dodd-Frank Act’s conflict minerals rules, the UK Modern Slavery Act 2015, the French Duty of Vigilance Law
2017, The Netherlands Due Diligence on Child Labour Act
2017 and the Australian Modern Slavery Act 2018, have
implications for companies operating in the West as well
as their suppliers in the developing world. What is new in
these regulations is that they require companies to provide
transparency statements or disclosures on tackling modern
slavery and forced labour arising from their business operations. While research on corporate transparency, in general,

2

We acknowledge that defining modern slavery and unethical practices are complex phenomena and debatable. In particular, there are
complex boundaries to determine ethical practices within supply
chains located across developing and developed nations. What can
be regarded as acceptable practice in the developing world, may not
be regarded as ethical in many developed nations. For example, child
labour is unethical in the western world, but the dismissal of already
employed child workers in many parts of the developing world could
have immediate and devastating impacts on the child workers and
their families whose survival depends on the income earned by these
children. The unemployment or immediate dismissal may lead to
poverty conditions and result in increased (child) prostitution. While
employment of child labour is not ethical in the UK, EU, USA or to
the international community, such practice can be acceptable (even
from an ethical perspective), in many parts of developing world
where unemployment of children threatens their fundamental right to
survival (Rahman et al., 1999).

457

is not new (see Bushman et al., 2004 for financial transparency and Islam & Van Staden, 2018 for social transparency), research investigating the extent to which particular
transparency regulations is perceived to create transparency
and accountability is sparse. While voluntary disclosure by
companies is increasing over time (see, for example, KPMG,
2008, 2017), disclosure practices as part of transparency in
response to regulation are weak (Birkey et al., 2018; Chauvey et al., 2015). This is echoed in more recent industry
research, which shows that initial modern slavery disclosures
in response to the UK Modern Slavery Act 2015 are low
(Steiner-Dicks, 2019). While it is still too early to gain a full
understanding of how companies are responding to the UK
Modern Slavery Act and whether this will bring long-term
social justice, our research contributes to critical work on
the limitations of modern slavery transparency regulations.
Section 54 of the UK Modern Slavery Act 20153 requires
companies with an annual turnover of £36 million or more to
publish a modern slavery statement in relation to its supply
chains every year on its website. Companies covered by this
section need to disclose the following information (Home
Office, 2015, p. 12):
• Their organisational structure, business, and supply

chains;

• Their policies in relation to slavery and human traffick-

ing;

• Their due diligence processes in relation to slavery and

human trafficking in their business and supply chains;

• The parts of their business and supply chains where the

risk of slavery and/or human trafficking arises, and the
steps they have taken to assess and manage the risk;
• Their effectiveness in ensuring that slavery and human
trafficking are not taking place in their business or supply
chains, measured against such performance indicators as
they consider appropriate;
• The training and capacity-building about slavery and
human trafficking made available to their staff.
Section 54 was not originally included in the act. This
section was brought in at the amendment stage following
civil society campaigns, which led to the ‘last minute’ attention given to supply chain disclosures with minimum compliance requirements (or minimum disclosure requirements)
(The Guardian, 2015; LeBaron & Rühmkorf, 2019). The act
was not applicable to the public sector. There was an attempt
3

As we are interested to explore how a new form of regulation creates transparency in global supply chains, we find Sect. 54 of the UK
Modern Slavery Act 2015 the most relevant for our study. The Act
also have a number of other provisions (including human trafficking
offences and the creation of an independent anti-slavery commissioner) focussing more on the local context (i.e. the UK context).

13

458

to introduce draft disclosure for public sector supply chains,
but that was lost in the legislative processes when the 2017
UK general election was called and has not subsequently
been resurrected (Hansard, 2019).
The minimum compliance requirements under Section 54
do not specify what a modern slavery statement must include
in terms of disclosures or how it should be structured. It
provides a non-exhaustive list of information that may be
included (Home Office, 2015). While the Act indicates that
organisations should, as a minimum, describe the main
actions they have taken during the financial year to deal
with modern slavery risks in their supply chains and their
own business (Home Office, 2015), it emphasises that these
organisations should present a detailed picture of all the
steps they have taken to address and remedy modern slavery,
and the effectiveness of all such steps (The Barrister, 2019).
The Act’s requirements appear quite broad and setting a minimum disclosure requirement leaves discretion to companies
over the interpretation and implementation of the Act. As
a result, there are flexibility and opportunities for different
approaches to the level of desired disclosure and the degree
of coordination within and between organisations. Moreover,
while knowledge of how transparency reporting practices are
set or regulated is sparse, a critical question relates to the
degree to which regulated organisations have digested the
Act so far, where the boundaries of implementation may be,
and the effectiveness of the Act. At the same time, earlier
research has found a limited response and low disclosure
(Stevenson & Cole, 2018), and many companies have not
published the required statements (Hansard, 2019). While
there is the public and academic discourse on the limitations
of the Act for protecting the public interest (The Guardian, 2015; Hansard, 2019; LeBaron & Rühmkorf, 2019;
Roshitsh, 2021; Sobik, 2020; Stevenson & Cole, 2018), we
specifically focus on supply chain transparency and the Act’s
ability to become normative (i.e. being regarded as good or
desirable or permissible). We argue that anti-slavery campaign groups and civil society organisations are in a better
position to provide narratives about the limitations of the
act. In other words, in line with the counter-account literature focussing on working conditions within global supply
chains (Islam et al., 2021, 2018; Semeen & Islam, 2021),
we problematise the disclosure regulations through counternarratives by anti-slavery campaign organisations. While
the existing literature is rich in terms of exploring counternarratives/accounts on different social and environmental
issues (see, for example, Semeen & Islam, 2021; Neu et al.,
2020; Lehman et al., 2016), the issues of modern slavery are
under-researched.
Regulations are usually introduced in the name of protecting the ‘public interest’ or the welfare of the general
public.4 However, there is a broader concern that the regulators’ purpose of protecting the public interest is sometimes

13

M. A. Islam, C. J. Van Staden

unclear, because it is unclear how the public interest should
be defined and how it could be protected in practice. In
particular, the broader tension highlighted in the critical
regulation literature is that a particular regulation could be
thwarted by regulatory capture. Regulatory capture results
in regulation that gains support from different constituencies
but may in fact not be in the public’s best interest (Baudot
et al., 2017). History provides many examples of regulators
prioritising the interest of the regulated who have power and
wealth over that of the general public (Wilson et al., 2018).
Accordingly, it can be argued that if certain powerful groups
or multinational companies (MNCs) capture the regulatory
process or the implementation of the regulation, policies or
regulations like the Modern Slavery Act 2015 will probably
be that much less effective in changing the way that organisations operate, i.e. the Act may not lead to the required or
expected transparency about modern slavery and may not
achieve normativity.

Transparency and Normativity
Previous research investigated the impact of regulations on
corporate transparency and disclosures with regards to different social and environmental issues, using market theories (such as agency theory, Blacconiere & Northcut, 1997;
Blacconiere & Patten, 1994) and non-market theories (i.e.
legitimacy perspectives, Islam & McPhail, 2011; Larrinaga
et al., 2002) to explain disclosures. In this paper, we use
a non-market theoretical construct, which includes notions
of transparency (Egels-Zandén & Hansson, 2016; EgelsZandén et al., 2015; Gardner et al., 2019) and regulatory
normativity (Ewick & Silbey, 1998, 2003) to analyse the
limitations of transparency required under the UK Modern
Slavery Act. Each component of the theoretical framework
for this research is discussed below.

The Notion of Supply Chain Transparency
A wide range of social science studies ranging from communication, business and accounting, development studies,
ethics, law, political science to public administration have
proliferated the concept of transparency (i.e. Islam & Van

4

Historically, regulation, in the name of protecting the welfare of the
general people, is typically enacted after a (financial, social or environmental) crisis (Harnay & Scialom, 2016). For example, following
Enron’s collapse, the US government introduced the Sarbanes–Oxley
Act to protect shareholders by requiring companies to be more transparent about their internal controls (Coates, 2007). And following the
2008 financial crisis, the governments of many countries brought in
legislation to increase the monitoring of banks and thereby to protect
the public interest (Kim & Muldoon, 2015).

Modern Slavery Disclosure Regulation and Global Supply Chains: Insights from Stakeholder…

Staden, 2018; Qian et al., 2015; Gardner et al., 2019; Gold
& Heikkurinen, 2018; Egels-Zandén et al., 2015; Berliner,
2014; Fung et al., 2007; Hollyer et al., 2011; Meijer, 2009;
Bauhr & Nasiritousi, 2012; Finel & Lord, 1999, 2007; Grigorescu, 2003; Rosenfeld & Denice, 2015; Fenster, 2010;
Pinto, 2009; Bernstein, 2017; Buell et al., 2017; Zhu, 2004)
and our review of these studies suggest that transparency is a
ubiquitous, relational concept. As a relational concept, transparency can relate to financial concerns (see, for example,
Qian et al., 2015; Barth & Schipper, 2008), non-financial
and/or social concerns (Islam & Van Staden, 2018; Quaak
et al., 2007), political concerns (Heard-Lauréote, 2007) and
so on. In the business literature, transparency studies can
be broadly classified into financial and social transparency.
While financial transparency, in general, relates to the disclosure of financial and market information by corporations
(Barth & Schipper, 2008), social transparency relates to the
disclosure of social responsibility information by corporations (Islam & Van Staden, 2018). In this paper, we focus
on supply chain transparency—a form of social transparency
mostly covered in the general business literature (Egels-Zandén et al., 2015; Gardner et al., 2019; Gold & Heikkurinen,
2018; Islam & Van Staden, 2018; Steinfield et al., 2011).
We specifically focus on supply chain-related transparency
provisions within the UK Modern Slavery Act.
Previous research that focussed on transparency within
global supply chains, refers to corporate transparency as the
disclosure of specific information, including the traceability
of suppliers by providing the names and factory locations of
suppliers involved in producing the organisation’s products
and the working conditions associated with these suppliers
(Egels-Zandén et al., 2015; Gardner et al., 2019). Arguably
‘traceability’ of information is one of the critical ways to
define the limits of transparency. That is, to be traceable, a
member of the broader community (including consumers)
should be able to easily trace where (which factory) and
how a particular product was manufactured (this includes
production, transport, and processing systems). Traceability
of information provides transparency around factory operations and factory disclosures, and this could result in positive
changes in the way that organisations manage their supply
chain labour practices (Egels-Zandén & Hansson, 2016).
However, there is a view that disclosing this information
generates risks and expenses for a corporation if its competitors do not disclose similar information (Egels-Zandén &
Hansson, 2016). ‘For that reason, mandatory factory disclosure would be justified as a measure to level the playing
field and to help ensure that those corporations who do the
least to police their supply chain labor practices are not
rewarded by their ability to remain hidden in the shadows’
(Doorey, 2011, p. 601).
By focussing on global supply chains, Gold and Heikkurinen (2018) argue that while past research has claimed

459

that transparency leads to responsibility and thus drives
sustainable changes in business organisations’ practices,
this is not the case within global supply chains. They
provide a theoretical framework that shows that claims
(calls) for corporate transparency, as a means to increase
the responsibility of MNCs for their supply chains, have
proved inadequate. Gold and Heikkurinen’s (2018) insights
are consistent with prior critical accounting literature that
highlighted the difficulty of providing a nuanced contextualised understanding of transparency through corporate
disclosures (see, for example, Coslor, 2016; Roberts,
2009). While these authors did not examine transparency
regulations, given the emerging trend to regulate for transparency across countries, we are particularly interested
in the UK’s call for transparency in supply chains via the
Modern Slavery Act 2015. Gold and Heikkurinen’s (2018)
findings could be relevant for a situation where a regulator fails to achieve its regulatory objective of ensuring
corporate transparency. We argue that there is a significant
research gap, a need to address how regulations such as the
UK Modern Slavery Act further the idea of transparency
in an attempt to eliminate (modern) slavery from global
supply chains. We argue that understanding this kind of
social transparency is important, as there are situations or
contexts (including regulatory contexts) in which compromising transparency for protecting corporate self-interest
can be regarded as unethical and can have critical consequences for vulnerable stakeholders, including workers in
global supply chains operating in developing countries.
We take a stakeholder perspective using the narratives
(interviews) of anti-slavery activists which can be regarded
as counter-narratives and we, therefore, refer to the counteraccount literature to inform and motivate our approach. The
literature on counter/alternative accounts argues that counter-narratives are the alternative representations or accounts
of organisations and regulatory bodies, produced by NGOs
and social movement organisations as a part of their actions
against social inequality and irresponsibility (Vinnari &
Laine, 2017; Gallhofer et al., 2006; Lehman et al., 2016;
Semeen & Islam, 2021; Islam et al., 2018, 2021). Counteraccounts are often mobilised to make heard the voices of
vulnerable groups by exposing social inequalities perpetuated by the elites (Gallhofer et al., 2006; Vinnari & Laine,
2017). The counter-account literature that focuses on global
supply chains (i.e. Semeen & Islam, 2021; Islam et al., 2018,
2021) offers the insight that NGOs and activists are crucial
actors in exposing problems with corporate transparency
and accountability, and the failure to protect workers within
global supply chains. Accordingly, we argue that the narratives of anti-slavery activists are very important to expose
the problems and issues hindering the achievement of transparency with regards to modern slavery, and these narratives
are essential catalysts for future change.

13

460

The Notion of the Normativity of Regulation
Drawing on the broader social science literature on the
normativity of regulation (Baier, 2016; Chelli et al., 2018;
Ewick & Silbey, 1998, 2003; Jackson, 2018; Schmidt &
Rakoczy, 2018), we examine the disclosure provisions of
the UK Modern Slavery Act. Normativity describes moral
bases or values of regulation and regulatory compliance.
Ewick and Silbey (1998) suggest that normativity provides
a dimension of people’s belief about how participants (both
professional and laypeople) should act in legal interactions.
It also specifies why regulation should, or should not, be
invoked, obeyed, or resisted. In short, ‘references to normativity describe the moral bases of legality’ (Ewick & Silbey,
1998, p.83). When people repeatedly refer to regulation as
being impartial and objective, they view this as normative.
‘Impartiality corresponds to the absence of a historical,
biographical and socially located, and thus “interested”,
self’ (Ewick & Silbey, 2003, p. 1342). The notion of normativity may be further transformed from a normative claim
about how things should be done to a factual description
of how the real-world works (Ewick & Silbey, 2003). In
other words, the idea of normativity posits that, other than
the normative claim, those taking part in legal interactions
provide the understanding of how actors mobilise the law
and evaluate legal processes and their invocations, and even
how they use the law outside formal legal settings. Accordingly, the normativity of regulation is about more than just
the core legal phenomena with interest in the effectiveness of
law or consequences of regulations (Sarat & Kearns, 1993)
but also involves the evaluation of the due processes above
and beyond the formal legal setting. Normativity, therefore,
suggests that regulation is regarded as good or desirable.
There are different reasons why regulators face a challenge in gaining normative status for regulation. Regulators
can themselves be obstacles or barriers to the acceptance
of regulations if they lack sufficient expertise to understand
the work processes that they are regulating (Gray & Silbey,
2014). This may manifest through a lack of monitoring or
expertise in auditing compliance with the regulations or
relate to other reasons. The regulators may also face challenges because the regulations lack impartiality (in particular during the implementation of the law). Ewick and Silbey
(2003, p. 1347) describe the antithesis to normativity in the
following way:
‘…other accounts described the arbitrariness of legal
authority, its unpredictability, and raw power. Here law
was simply the power of the powerful. Rather than
seeing legal authority as derived from moral principles, objective reasoning, or regulated processes that
legitimated its power, these stories reversed the direction of legitimation, describing power as producing the

13

M. A. Islam, C. J. Van Staden

normative grounds upon which legality is exercised.
Might, in these stories, makes right’.
This statement illustrates a primary obstacle to the normativity of regulations, arbitrariness, unpredictability, or
uncertainty of legal authority. At the same time, another
major obstacle to normativity is the abuse of power in the
regulatory process. Through the process of regulating, or of
gaining legitimation for regulation, powerful groups may
gain power by disregarding the moral principles underlying
the regulations.
While the notion of the normativity of regulation contains
the moral bases for the legality, the moral basis of the UK
Modern Slavery Act is in its aim, which is to eliminate modern slavery practices. Nevertheless, there is a risk that power
imbalances may erode the Act’s normativity. While the limits of transparency can be assessed by exploring the normativity of the regulation, the issue remains under-researched.
While normativity concerns the values underlying regulations, we assess the regulatory value by exploring the views
of the broader community, including anti-slavery campaign
groups, in responding to the regulations.
Prior research (e.g. Buhmann, 2011; Bebbington et al.,
2012; Manacorda, 2014; Chauvey et al., 2015; Acerete
et al., 2019; Manacorda, 2014; Birkey et al., 2018; Senn &
Giordano-Spring, 2020; Brusca et al., 2018; Chelli et al.,
2018—summarised in Table 1), focuses on different regulations ranging from country-level environmental reporting
laws and CSR, to public sector accountability and reporting standards, used different methods ranging from content
analysis, reviews, discourse analysis to interviews, to investigate the normativity of regulations. What this research
reveals is that, in general, social and environmental disclosure regulations have an impact on normativity. Chauvey
et al. (2015) and Chelli et al. (2018) found that companies in
certain countries, over time, disclosed high levels of information complying with the regulatory disclosure requirements resulting in high levels of normativity. Birkey et al.
(2018) argued that during the early stages of disclosure regulation, attainment of normativity by the concerned companies appeared to be low. A few studies (see, for example,
Chauvey et al., 2015) tried to separate the attainment of an
act’s normativity from the quality of disclosure and found
that while a level of normativity may be attained, disclosure
quality is not high and therefore, the act’s goals of increased
transparency may remain unmet.
While prior disclosure research examined normativity of
particular disclosure regulations by documenting the extent
of corporate disclosure in compliance with the regulations,
in this paper, we examine the attainment of the normativity
of a disclosure regulation, the UK Modern Slavery Act, in
the public domain, using stakeholder narratives. Our focus
on stakeholder narratives is different from prior quantitative

The study enhances our understanding of CSR normativity by
drawing on the internationalisation of societal norms and law on
social responsibility informing
the demands on corporations. The
study argues that the law need not
conflict with the widespread view
of CSR as ‘voluntary’
Using a constructivist perspective, this study provides a better
understanding of compliance with
reporting regulations by showing
evidence that the production of
normativity not only depends on
the enforcement of the law but also
depends on less formal rules and
the emergence of shared beliefs and
internal legitimacy
The study broadens our understanding of “normative hybridisation,”
for tackling corruption, in which
hard and soft laws, public and
private initiatives are all merged
together in a sole legal instrument
This paper contributes to the literature by showing that regulations
on CSR disclosure generated
normativity over time. The study
argued that while CSR disclosure
has increased in terms of space
and breadth, indicating a sense of
greater normativity of regulations,
the disclosures do not reach a quality level that allows complying with
the goal of transparency set up by
regulations

Buhmann (2011)

Chauvey et al. (2015)

Manacorda, (2014)

Bebbington et al. (2012)

Contributions

References

Literature review

Content analysis and regression
analysis

Electricity industry

Industry neutral

Publicly traded French companies
from various industry sectors

Spain and UK (Reporting regimes
addressing environmental issues)

The United Nations (Convention
against Corruption (UNCAC))

France (Regulation of disclosure of
social and environmental information)

Content analysis and Interviews

Discourse and textual analysis

Industry neutral

EU context (CSR)

Methods

Industry context

Country context (focus area)

Table 1  Contributions of the prior literature on the normativity of corporate responsibility and disclosure regulations

Modern Slavery Disclosure Regulation and Global Supply Chains: Insights from Stakeholder…
461

13

Contributions

With respect to company disclosure
response, this study documents
relatively high compliance with the
legislation, although the disclosure
responses appeared to be more
symbolic than substantive in nature.
The symbolic or limited quality of
disclosure suggests that, without
additional rules and guidance, the
concerned law alone may not lead
to meaningful social disclosure
Chelli et al. (2018)
In a comparative study, the authors
found that the French parliamentary
regime is more successful (in the
production of normativity) than the
Canadian regulation in generating
environmental disclosures and that
the external expectations including
GRI combined with local regimes
prompt the production of normativity
Brusca et al. (2018)
The study provides an understanding
of the use of normativity theory in
explaining the normativity process
for issuing consolidated reporting
standards for local governments in
the European context
Acerete et al. (2019)
The study found a low level of environmental information (reported
by sample companies) because
of the lack of an open process of
normativity
Senn and Giordano-Spring (2020) This study offers a better understanding of how a common regulation
may lead to interpretative strategies
by different actors and networks
of actors, contributing to shaping
environmental accounting information

Birkey et al. (2018)

References

Table 1  (continued)

13
Environmental sensitive industries

France (Environmental reporting
regulation)

Content analysis, semi-structured
interviews

Content analysis

Spanish toll sector corporations

Content analysis and statistical model

Spain (Environmental financial
accounting regulation)

Companies from various industry
sectors

France and Canada (Environmental
disclosure regulations)

Content analysis/ Regression model

Interviews

Retail sector

USA (CTSCA)

Methods

Italy, Spain, and Sweden (Public sec- Local government
tor reporting standards)

Industry context

Country context (focus area)

462
M. A. Islam, C. J. Van Staden

Modern Slavery Disclosure Regulation and Global Supply Chains: Insights from Stakeholder…

studies (see, for example, Chauvey et al., 2015; Chelli et al.,
2018; Birkey et al., 2018) on the normativity of social
and environmental disclosure regulations and qualitative
(interview-based) studies (Bebbington et al., 2012; Senn &
Giordano-Spring, 2020) that documented the views of corporate managers and industry representatives and offered an
understanding of internal (managerial) perspectives regarding the normativity of particular social and environmental
disclosure regulations.

Research Methods
This study draws on interviews with anti-slavery campaign
organisations and experts on corporate compliance with the
UK Modern Slavery Act 2015. Fourteen interviews were
conducted between September 2018 and February 2019:
three interviews with corporate and industry managers, two
interviews with ethical investment firms, seven with antislavery campaign organisations (ACOs) (code 1–7), one
with a government representative and one with a policy
adviser from a professional accounting body in the UK.5
The overall size and selection of the interviewees for this
study is purposive. The overall strategy of interview data
collection is often driven by the notion of data saturation—
saturation is considered to have occurred when consecutive
interviews do not provide the researcher with any new or
additional insights (Malsch & Salterio, 2016). In relation to
the data collection strategy and the saturation point, Malsch
and Salterio (2016) argue that the central aim/research question of the study is an important driver of the sample size.
They also argue that the authors’ expertise in the chosen
topic, and research that uses more than one source of data
collection (for example, interviews and documents) reduce
the number of participants needed. Accordingly, as we
mainly focussed on anti-slavery campaign organisations,
we interviewed a sufficient number of activists from different anti-slavery campaign organisations, to meet our saturation point. We had three more interviews with people from
anti-slavery campaign organisations, but these did not give
us any additional insights (this approach is also consistent
with Islam et al., 2018). Our extensive prior experience on
the topic, interview methods and document analysis, and
our use of multiple document sources in addition to interviews (see below) gives us confidence that our sample size
is sufficient for our analysis. Interviews with other people
(from government and industry) reflect mainly their official
5
While our extensive prior experience on the topic helped us to
identify organisations working on modern slavery issues, a member
of a global ethical trading campaign group was requested to identify
suitable organisations that are active in the area of workers’ rights and
anti-slavery movements in global supply chains.

463

responses, which were already available in government/legal
documents, corporate reports and industry documents. The
interviewees are listed in the Appendix, keeping the interviewee identity confidential, in line with the research ethics
guidelines.
Interviews were conducted with senior officials at various
organisations. Interviewees were knowledgeable about modern slavery at different organisations working to eliminate
modern slavery in the UK and its supply chains, and organisations experiencing higher levels of oversight and monitoring of corporate compliance with the Modern Slavery Act.
The views of campaigners and experts represent a unique
resource within the modern slavery context that has received
relatively little research attention. The opinions documented
via interviews with anti-slavery activists constitutes a form
of counter-narrative, which were helpful to problematise the
disclosure provisions of the modern slavery Act. Our selection of activists from anti-slavery campaign organisations as
a producer of counter-narratives is purposive and consistent
with the approach followed in critical and counter accounting research (Gallhofer et al., 2006; Semeen & Islam, 2021;
Lehman et al., 2016), that challenges the prevailing official
and hegemonic position.
All people approached agreed to participate in telephone
interviews and all were recorded with consent. The communication for appointments and consent was done via email.
Interviews were transcribed within a week of the interview taking place. The interviews lasted from 30 min to
one hour. While an interview guide was used, the questions
were open-ended. Before commencing the interviews, the
project was explained to each interviewee. As all interviews
were conducted on a confidential basis, the observations
reflected have not been attributed to a specific person or
their organisation.
Across a wide range of research settings, we held informal communications and meetings (during workshops and
conferences) with a large group of academics and industry
experts on modern slavery, which helped this research to
stay focussed on the research questions. While interviews
were designed to probe the interpretations experts and activists of the implementation of the UK Modern Slavery Act,
informal talks and meetings with a broader group of people helped the researchers to understand how the regulation
works, how the work is done and what practitioners find
satisfying and frustrating about it. This approach is consistent with sociology research (Gray & Silbey, 2014) and we
found this approach helped us gain a broader understanding
of the UK Modern Slavery Act.
In particular, through interviews and informal communication, we learned how the participants interpret the governing rules and procedures (Gray & Silbey, 2014). In line
with this broader understanding, interviewees were explicitly asked to share their experience of whether the Act was

13

464

achieving its primary purpose, to interpret the Act’s limitations or boundaries, and to interpret its merits or demerits.
While these questions were an indirect way to examine the
theoretical constructs – transparency and normativity – we
found this one of the best ways to support the research.
Without this approach, we would not have been able to fully
understand the limitations to the transparency and disclosure
provisions within the Modern Slavery Act.
We analysed the data by drawing on Miles and Huberman’s (1994) approach for conducting qualitative research.
We followed the following key steps to process our data:
• All interview transcripts were read and coded in an

attempt to interpret the data. All references to, and
descriptions of, regulators and regulations by the people we interviewed were also collected and reviewed.
The interviews helped us to analyse the implementation,
transparency and normativity of the Modern Slavery
Act during its early implementation and the associated
mechanisms for UK companies sourcing products from
overseas.
• We reviewed all available documents (selected from
our extensive web-search) including three legal documents, 25 reports by NGOs and anti-slavery campaign
organisations (five of these reports were sent to us by
our interviewees from anti-slavery campaign organisations) and law firms, 20 news articles in the British news
media and five modern slavery statements and corporate
reports produced by our corporate interviewee organisations. This helped us to understand and code statements
both by regulatory bodies, corporations and anti-slavery
activist groups.
• By following a holistic coding system (Miles et al.,
2014), we formed a comprehensive understanding of
the overall contents of the interviews and documents. In
our analysis, we mostly focussed on the statements and
quotes from interviewees and we gave limited emphasis
to the contents and statements from secondary documents as these were mostly overlapping with the interviews.
Analysis of the narratives, particularly those of anti-slavery activists, was performed in the light of the adopted theoretical concepts including the notion of transparency and the
notion of normativity. Key interview questions and findings
are presented in Table 2. Before interviewing people and
analysing relevant reports and documents, we have formed
a broad understanding of transparency and normativity. During the analysis, we refined and reframed our theoretical
constructs to explain our data better. We adopted the theoretical framework discussed in Sect. 3 to analyse the opinions provided by experts and this helped us to uncover the
various ways in which the interviewees express and interpret

13

M. A. Islam, C. J. Van Staden

their relationships with the Modern Slavery Act as it seeks
to regulate modern slavery in global supply chains.

Findings and Analysis
The UK Modern Slavery Act and Supply Chain
Transparency
We commence our analysis by discussing different aspects
of the limitations of the UK Modern Slavery Act. We, in
particular, provide narratives of anti-slavery activists as a
part of a critical analysis of the Act’s attempts to eliminate
modern slavery and ensure justice to less privileged groups
(this being workers in developing nations) in global supply chains. A summary of the key findings is presented in
Table 2.
Limitations of Purpose and Scope of the Act
We first consider activists and experts’ views on the purpose
of the UK Modern Slavery Act of 2015. There are consensus
views that the overall aim of the Act is to reduce modern
slavery in UK companies’ supply chains. Regulatory actors
interviewed echoed corporate actors who see the Act as aiming to create a ‘level playing field’ for reporting on human
rights risks, managing reputational risks, and driving change
in the internal systems and procedures of organisational culture. Anti-slavery campaign groups in the UK see the Act as
a positive development, but its aim is sometimes misunderstood. There is scepticism about whether the requirements
by themself could help reduce slavery and forced labour in
the domestic and overseas operations of the UK organisations. ‘There is confusion because we believe the aim would
be to reduce modern slavery and compensate victims, but
corporations may have thought that the regulatory aim is
to reduce business risk only’ (anti-slavery camping actor,
3). There is a common view among anti-slavery activists
that the Act should cover broader aims than corporations’
desire to reduce business risks. There is also a consensus
view that activists and civil society groups have played a
significant role in the development of the present form of the
act (including its purpose). ‘If you want to understand the
Modern Slavery Act and whatever development behind this
so far, you need to understand the roles of the civil society
groups and NGOs’ (anti-slavery campaign actor, 1). In fact,
civil society groups and NGO campaigns for the inclusion
of Sect. 54 were emancipatory as their campaigns eventually led the UK government to introduce this section. This
suggests, in line with the counter-account/narrative literature (Gallhofer et al., 2006; Vinnari & Laine, 2017), that
civil society groups’ voices, to some extent, were heard
by the regulator. However, as we will see in the following

Limits to transparency

Organisations required to disclose

Disclosure provisions

What do you see as the primary purpose of
this legislation?

Purpose of the act

There are consensus views (except the views
of anti-slavery activists) that the overall aim
set in the Act is to reduce modern slavery in
UK companies’ supply chains
Regulatory actors interviewed echoed corporate actors and see the Act as aiming to
create a ‘level playing field’. Anti-slavery
activists see its aim as sometimes being
misunderstood because corporations may be
engaged to reduce business risk only and not
the elimination of slavery
Regulatory, corporate actors and industry
actors find the minimum disclosure a positive development towards transparency
The activists see minimum disclosure regulation as problematic because this does not
create transparency and managers may use
disclosure in an opportunistic manner

Key responses from interviewees

Anti-slavery activists believe that £36mil cutWhether and how the reporting entities
off is arbitrary
defined under the Act are objective and conducive to eliminate slavery on a large scale? Regulatory actors and corporate actors speculate on the inclusion of the public sector in
the future. They are less concerned about the
cut-off point
What do you see as the limits to the transpar- The activists feel that the Act and its miniency provisions within the act?
mum disclosure provision lacks insights into
the traceability and verifiability of modern
slavery
Regulatory and industry actors agree that
disclosure may not reflect the real corporate
action
Why do you see the transparency provisions
The activists believe that the Act’s transparwithin the Act as critical?
ency regulations are critical because the Act
does not have clear provisions to protect
workers in the global supply chains operating in the developing world

Why do you see the minimum regulation as
problematic?

Why do you see the minimum regulation as
effective?

Why do you think the purpose is positive?
Why do you see the purpose as critical?

Main interview questions

Key issues

Table 2  Summary of key findings

Traceability of information and the location of
where products are sourced (suppliers/factories) is needed
Issues with minimum disclosures and transparency
Limited insights into whether suppliers (mostly
from developing nations) abide by the Act
Issues with verification and monitoring
Workers and the broader community are
excluded

A few studies on normativity are supportive
of minimum disclosure regulations given
the presence of minimum regulation and/or
guidance
Corporate actors in particular always prefer
guidance for disclosures
The activists are very critical of the minimum
disclosure requirement as this does not necessarily result in the elimination of slavery
All organisations should be covered
£36mil cut-off is arbitrary
Concerns over the exemption of public sector
organisations

Limited confidence among interviewees in the
Act’s purpose of meeting transparency
The Act aims to reduce or eliminate concerns
over disclosures to create transparency
Significant concerns that Act’s goals are more
for the reduction of business risk than for
reduction of slavery (or reduction of workers’
vulnerability)

Findings based on interviews and documents

Modern Slavery Disclosure Regulation and Global Supply Chains: Insights from Stakeholder…
465

13

Main interview questions

13

Normativity and the act

Tell us the about the negative aspects of the
Act?

Tell us about the positive aspects of the Act?

Findings based on interviews and documents

Powerful business interest limited the extent of
regulation
Interpretation of risk driven by business
interests
Concerns over the protection of corporate
dominance and hegemony
Issues associated with a call for transparency
and actual actions for curbing slavery
Modern slavery statements may not reflect
modern slavery activities
The activists feel that the normativity of the
Issues that reduce normativity (lack of transparAct depends on stakeholder engagement
ency and the influence of powerful interest
and their own roles to influence companies
groups)
to be socially responsible. Government and Raises the awareness of corporate transparency
corporate actors see positive sides of the
issues
minimum disclosure and ‘no penalty for
Enhance normativity by encouraging greater
non-compliance’ provisions as these may
engagement by activists and foster change in
hamper companies’ engagement to solve the
corporate transparency
slavery problem
Issues with monitoring and surveillance by
anti-slavery groups
The activists find that the Act lacks the capacity to protect the public interest and workers’ Minimum disclosure requirement alone and
lack of punitive measures are not supportive
rights over corporate interests
of normativity

Key responses from interviewees

The activists are concerned that the Act was
Influence of powerful groups on the regulation Did the process and implementation of the
a result of the influence of powerful groups
regulation lead to dominance by powerful
and the disconnection between disclosure
like the business community. Also, while
groups?
and actions
corporate and industry actors are happy to
Did the focus on risk lead to a disregard of the
see the Act as a risk minimisation tool, the
effect on workers and victims of slavery?
activists sees this as a problem because the
Do you find a disparity between the Act’s
Act does not address the risk of vulnerable
transparency regulations and actual actions
workers being victims of modern slavery
for eliminating slavery?

Key issues

Table 2  (continued)

466
M. A. Islam, C. J. Van Staden

467

Modern Slavery Disclosure Regulation and Global Supply Chains: Insights from Stakeholder…

discussions, the anti-slavery activist narrative, as shown by
the interviews, revealed that Sect. 54 did not have enough
substance, and the resulting change in transparency achieved
was therefore limited.
From interviews, we found mixed responses, ranging
from a sense that the Act’s intention was to extend the
elimination of modern slavery (to suppliers in developing nations) to a perception of inherent limitations (since
it is merely a reporting requirement). The interviews also
revealed diverse views around awareness, uptake and posture among organisations in relation to modern slavery legislation. There is a consistent view among civil society and
anti-slavery campaign groups that massive efforts are needed
to extend awareness and training to corporate officials and
professionals such as lawyers and accountants working for
corporations.
While experts representing different stakeholders were
generally positive about the perceived aims of the Act, they
expressed concern about one provision within the regulation, which requires only organisations that have an annual
turnover of £36 million or above to publish a modern slavery
statement each year on their website. Many participants in
this study argue that this provision in the Act caps human
rights with reference to revenue and that numerous organisations are now not subject to the Act, i.e. there is the suggestion that those with ‘an annual turnover below £36 [million] do not need to care about human rights’ (anti-slavery
campaign actor, 1). The anti-slavery campaign groups, in
particular, find this provision problematic as managers might
try to find a way to avoid their responsibilities. One group
member told us ‘the cap may justify non-reporting companies’ increasing levels of human rights negligence in their
supply factories located in many developing nations’ (antislavery campaign actor, 2). There is also a view that the £36
million cap was rather strange, and many people wonder
where this figure came from.
Another problematic aspect of the Act is that it exempted
public sector organisations from publishing modern slavery
statements. Many government bodies (from healthcare to
defence bodies) source some or all the products they require
from suppliers in developing nations but are not covered
under this Act.6 From a transparency perspective, if the aim
is to create transparency, the revenue cap and the exclusion
of the public sector from the reporting requirements appear
to hinder the achievement of transparency at a broader level.
6
In the Modern Slavery independent review interim report, the
experts suggested that like the Australian Modern Slavery Act of
2018, the UK Government should extend Sect. 54 of the Act and
include reporting obligations for the UK public sector (Home Office,
2019). At the time of the revision of this article, we found that in
line with experts’ recommendations and civil society concerns, the
UK government has now suggested that public sector organisations
(including ministerial departments in England and Wales—Scotland
and Northern Ireland are considered separately) will be required to

Limitations of the Minimum Disclosure Provisions
The UK Modern Slavery Act 2015 suggests that relevant
companies disclose whatever plans and actions they have
put in place to curb modern slavery. Interviewees shared a
concern over the minimum disclosure provisions of the Act.
This remains effectively optional for organisations since if
a company simply states that ‘it does not have any slavery
in its entire operations, it meets the regulatory compliance’
(anti-slavery campaign actor, 1). ‘Nowhere in the regulation
clearly mentions [that] any information provided needs to
be verified externally’ (independent supply chain auditor and
anti-slavery campaign actor, 6).
While minimum disclosure requirements can be a sensible early step for many organisations, the activists we
interviewed expressed serious reservations that the disclosure provisions do not achieve the stated aim of the Act (i.e.
the elimination of modern slavery), and there is no legal
accountability associated with the disclosures. While the Act
requires a senior manager (CEO, director or general manager) to sign the report, we found some uncertainty among
interviewees about whether minimum disclosure requirements would help much in terms of holding the signatory
accountable. Where a director or senior manager signs off a
modern slavery statement, her/his responsibility is unclear,
i.e. their accountability is reduced to the minimum disclosure requirements. A big question remains: ‘if a CEO signs
a report with minimum information like “our company does
not have any slavery in its entire operations”, does it really
release [the] CEO’s responsibility and accountability to a
greater extent?’ (anti-slavery actor, 1). There is also a view
that the minimum disclosure requirements do not require
companies to provide detailed and factual information to the
wider community (anti-slavery campaign actor, 2).
In addition, there are concerns about the government’s
lack of initiative regarding the recording and availability of
modern slavery report submissions. There should be a modern slavery registry mechanism through which the public
can view submitted modern slavery statements with relative
ease.7
Interviewees share concerns that the minimum disclosure
provisions under Section 54 give organisations discretion to
disclose or not to disclose whatever they want to disclose
or not. While this has some advantages, there is a broader
Footnote 6 (continued)
produce modern slavery statements from 2021 (see, https://​www.​gov.​
uk/​gover​nment/​news/​new-​tough-​measu​res-​to-​tackle-​modern-​slave​ry-​
in-​supply-​chains).
7
In response to broader stakeholder concerns, on 11 March 2021
the UK government launched a ‘modern slavery statement register
online’ and it “strongly” encourages concerned organisations to submit their most recently published modern slavery statement to the
register to show what they have reported. However, this is still vol-

13

468

concern that regulators may not be able to hold organisations
accountable, given that many organisations do not apparently care about slavery practices in their supply chains.
‘Through the minimum disclosure requirement [it appears]
as if the entire transparency is reduced to [the] “disclosure”
provision of the Act’ (policy advisor, professional accounting
body). Past studies have revealed a level of concern about
the effectiveness of the minimum disclosure requirements
(Chilton & Sarfaty, 2017; Nolan, 2017; Phillips, 2015). Our
findings are therefore consistent with the past research in this
regard. However, there are studies that focus on the normativity of social and environmental disclosure regulations that
found that minimum or low legal requirements and global
norms/guidelines such as the GRI, may prompt the achievement of normativity (Chelli et al., 2018). At the same time,
Chelli et al. (2018) suggest that minimum requirements,
while achieving normativity, may not create transparency.
We argue that minimum disclosure requirements may not
create transparency if civil society or activist groups do not
put pressure on companies to be socially accountable. We
also argue, in line with the literature on alternative accounts
(Islam et al., 2018, 2020; Gallhofer et al., 2006), that the
narratives of anti-slavery activists need to be mobilised to
create change in corporate accountability and transparency
within global supply chains.
There is a consensus view that ‘ensuring transparency is
one of the key aims of the UK Modern Slavery Act’ (retail
industry association leader). While political leaders express
the same view when talking about the UK Modern Slavery
Act, many may not be aware that the minimum disclosure
provision (as discussed previously), may jeopardise transparency. A few industry experts stated that ‘the act was a positive development of transparency’ (policy advisor, professional accounting body), but the anti-slavery activists were
concerned about the possible gap between disclosure and
actual action – ‘I am concerned about how due diligence
works or what is actually happening on the ground. There
is a disparity between disclosure and what is happening on
the ground’ (senior anti-slavery campaign actor, 2).
Lack of Traceability, Verifiability and Transparency
to the Broader Community
While a few global retailers disclose supplier information
(including factory locations), interviewees expressed mixed
views about the traceability of factory locations. Surprisingly, one British retail company that was recently ranked
among the top three modern slavery statement producers by

Footnote 7 (continued)
untary (see, https://​www.​gov.​uk/​gover​nment/​news/​gover​nment-​launc​
hes-​modern-​slave​ry-​state​ment-​regis​try).

13

M. A. Islam, C. J. Van Staden

a global consultancy firm stated that it does not disclose factory locations, as to do so would impact negatively on their
competitiveness. As their representative stated, ‘while we
have been one of the best modern slavery statement providers this year, our statement is comprehensive and detailed;
however, we maintain a fair level of privacy regarding
disclosing our suppliers’ information for our competitive
advantage’ (ethical trading manager, retail company). Such
an approach indicates inadequate transparency and also
calls into question the assessor (consultancy) firms that
rank companies’ best practice reporting. Those who assess
modern slavery statements should not disregard the issue
of traceability of factory locations within global supply
chains (Egels-Zandén & Hansson, 2016; Egels-Zandén et al.,
2015). While traceability is just one aspect of transparency,
this could be a good starting point for ensuring transparency to the broader community – some global companies,
such as Nike, disclose factory locations worldwide. However, invoking confidentiality and/or competitive advantage,
many retailers do not disclose their factory locations. Doing
so prompts the question of what competitive advantage a
company gains by hiding the location of the factories it uses?
This appears to be a major barrier to tackling modern slavery within global supply chains. Anti-slavery activists are
concerned over retailers’ use of ‘hidden factories’ with no
record of their factory human rights conditions (anti-slavery
actors, 1 and 3). While the Act is, to some extent, helpful in
the sense that retailers have to publish modern slavery statements, it does not have the scope to locate ‘hidden factories’
that retailers may have used (anti-slavery actor 3). In this
context, the news media and NGO counter-accounts have
played an important role in exposing poor working conditions in manufacturing (Islam et al., 2018) and related ethical
concerns within global supply chains (Islam et al., 2021).
Along with traceability, verifiability or monitoring is crucial to achieving transparency within global supply chains.
Verifiability has two aspects – how to verify what organisations say in their modern slavery statement, and any external
or independent auditor checks of modern slavery practices
in their supply chains. Concerns were expressed that both
aspects are disregarded in the Act. One member from an
anti-slavery campaign group (2) stated, ‘monitoring and
enforcement should be a big issue of [the] Modern Slavery
Act. Lack of transparency comes from a lack of monitoring
and sanctions, which in turn does not produce good results.’
The problem with the existing transparency mechanisms is
that in the absence of regulatory requirements on verifiability, organisations only respond when they run into trouble
when human rights negligence is exposed through NGO and
activist narratives (Islam et al., 2021). As an activist (antislavery campaign actor, 3) puts it, ‘lots of focus is related
to writing the statement. But in my view, the activity behind
the statement such as the due diligence process, audit and

Modern Slavery Disclosure Regulation and Global Supply Chains: Insights from Stakeholder…

monitoring supply factories, etc. is important. I am not sure
how this can be changed over time.’
Extant research (see, for example, Islam et al., 2018) has
looked at social compliance audit practices within global
supply chains and found tension surrounding the ability of
an audit (given its nature) to create accountability to workers. They also found that companies only use independent
or third-party auditors when faced with crises (such as the
Rana Plaza incident or associated media concerns). The
interviewees hold a pessimistic view of existing audit practices, expressing anxiety that as the Act includes no regulatory penalty or sanction, organisations’ audit or monitoring
exercises remain light. ‘I am doubtful that companies following the Act would use an independent audit in the supply
chains just to make sure there is no slavery in the chains’
(anti-slavery campaign actor, 7). Past research has revealed
that transparency and disclosure are crisis-led and retailers
usually respond to supply chain-related legitimacy crises
highlighted by news media with positive disclosures (Islam
& Deegan, 2010).
There is also a concern that workers’ or victims’ voices
would remain unheard. ‘The Act does not empower workers
and victims of modern slavery as there is no mechanism for
workers to follow the Act and get remedy if they are victims’
(anti-slavery campaign actor, 7). ‘At the grass-root level,
workers do not know who is buying the goods and, given
that some people may argue that workers have a right to
know whose products they are producing, that is why we
need to see transparency in the entire production process’
(independent supply chain auditor and anti-slavery campaign
actor, 6).
Domination by Powerful Interests
Domination by powerful corporate interests could be partly
responsible for many of the failures of transparency. The
central goal of the Modern Slavery Act, the assumption of
transparency, has somehow been constrained or influenced
(captured) by corporate interests and corporate risk management strategy. From the broader community perspective,
this is problematic, since they see managers as far more
concerned about business risk than the risk to the community. ‘To us, reporting is an important part of our risk
management strategy’ (CEO, civil contract association).
Anti-slavery campaign organisations are concerned about
the interpretation of the risks of modern slavery by corporate
management as a risk management strategy. One director of
an NGO (anti-slavery campaign actor, 1) stated:
The legislation talks about the risks of modern slavery,
so of course, that would mean how do business operations create the risk of modern slavery and human
trafficking. Do business operations deal with people

469

who are having a vulnerability, such as migrant workers, women workers, etc.? Does a company operate
in remote locations where people cannot see what is
going on? Does a company source product from a
supplier in a country with the vulnerability of modern
slavery? All of those things create the risk of slavery
and human trafficking. That’s the way we think about
risks. The way that the vast majority of businesses
think about risk is ‘what if it’s a risk to my business, to
my production or to my profit’. There is a tiny handful
of companies that are now beginning to understand
risk from the broader way than their own perspective,
but there is a very long way to go before the majority [of] companies get that. There is a long way for
businesses to realise people were victims of modern
slavery.
A follow-up interview with an anti-slavery campaign actor
has a similar view:
Whose risk? The risk to the business and not to the
society and the environment? If the Modern Slavery
Act is only a part of a manager’s risk management
strategy and not for eradicating slavery, we need to
have a big say!
Their view is that the application of the Modern Slavery Act
is problematic because it mainly protects industry interests
while victims’ interests and voices remain unheard. In other
words, it contains no strong provision stating that workers’
interests are directly protected by the Act. Most importantly,
supply chain complexities favour corporations over suppliers
and workers. The complexities create a favourable position
for powerful groups (Carpenter & Moss, 2013), leading to
compromises with business by, for example, not imposing
stringent requirements, such as for the independent audit of
labour rights.
The regulatory process is a political process in which
power struggles occur, and powerful actors dominate and
influence regulation for their own protection (Dal Bó & Di
Tella, 2003; Etzioni, 2009; Wilson et al., 2018). Given that,
one should not expect the process of formulating the Modern Slavery Act to be neutral or objective. One anti-slavery
activist (anti-slavery campaign actor, 5) stated ‘while the
Act remains the reflections of civil society organisations,
the way [the] Act was created, and in particular, the way
the regulation came up as a minimum disclosure requirement, was a result of the influence of powerful groups like a
business community’. Another activist stated, ‘Who created
weak regulation? Well, you need to understand there was a
political lobby… Companies feel it is costly for the compliance and they do not want any mandatory requirements and
penalty provision in case of non-compliance’ (anti-slavery
campaign activist, 4).

13

470

It has also been observed that a large number of companies are not subject to the Act, and neither is the public
sector. One activist (anti-slavery campaign, 1) stated that
‘you need to understand, the lobbies started even before the
Parliamentary bill was placed, a large number of business
members and industry groups perhaps lobbied the government to be excluded from the requirement’.
The literature also highlights broad community concerns
at how favourable the position is for organisations. LeBaron
and Rühmkorf (2019, p.738), quoting from an interview,
claimed that ‘there’s a lot of unwarranted excitement around
transparency. Every company has slavery in their supply
chain – anyone who says they don’t is lying or incompetent… Transparency legislation won’t do anything to change
that’. A global law firm claimed that there is a fundamental
flaw in the Act ‘as in reality, organizations could simply
state that no precautions have been taken to ensure their
organization is free of slavery and this would be accepted
as a compliance’.8
During the early stages of implementing a law, the regulator was either genuinely optimistic or at least prepared to
deploy persuasive arguments for the possible success of the
regulation. As the UK’s Prime Minister Theresa May stated,
during the early stages of regulatory compliance:
The first legislation of its kind in Europe, this act…
has delivered enhanced protection and support for victims and a world-leading transparency requirement on
businesses to show that modern slavery is not taking
place in their companies or their supply chains… But
we must not stop there. Just because we have some legislation does not mean that the problem is solved. So as
Prime Minister, I am setting up the first-ever government task force on modern slavery (UK Government,
2016, cross reference, Bloomfield & Lebaron, 2018).
Despite such persuasive language by the Prime Minister,
the broader concerns over regulatory capture are now more
visible than before. At present, the regulation is regarded as
doing more to serve large corporate interests than it does
to address the suffering of vulnerable workers employed
along global supply chains (Bloomfield & Lebaron, 2018).
In 2018, the UK’s first-ever Independent Anti-Slavery Commissioner, Kevin Hyland, who had been appointed by the
Prime Minister, resigned while citing government interference in his role (Dearden, 2018). Despite stating ‘the
law guarantees the independence of the Independent Antislavery Commissioner, who is responsible for improving
the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of
slavery and human trafficking offences’ (Dearden, 2018), in
his resignation letter Kevin Hyland ‘conceded failures over
8

Squire Patton Boggs (2015)

13

M. A. Islam, C. J. Van Staden

the lack of conviction of criminals, inadequate support for
slavery victims, and limited action from businesses to tackle
the problem’ (Ford, 2018). It appears that interest groups
have captured the regulation in a way that prevented the
Anti-slavery Commissioner from working independently to
curb modern slavery. This evidence is consistent with how
regulatory capture is defined within the diverse literature
(Levine & Forrence, 1990; Hantke-Domas, 2003; Baudot
et al., 2017; Dal Bó & Di Tella, 2003; Hines, 1991; Paisey
& Paisey, 2012).
Apparent Disconnection Between Anti‑Slavery Disclosure
and Actual Action
Previous research that examined transparency found a ‘transparency fallacy’ in global supply chains (Gold & Heikkurinen, 2018). Claimed transparency may not lead to socially
responsible behaviour (Gold & Heikkurinen, 2018). Following the analysis of the limits of the Modern Slavery Act,
it can be argued that, without substantive disclosure and
sanction provisions within the Act, any call for transparency
may not improve working conditions in supply chains. Such
scepticism is encouraged by research into transparency and
accountability in relation to the working conditions within
global supply chains (e.g. Islam et al., 2018).
One member from an anti-slavery campaign group (actor,
1) expressed concern that (obviously) disclosure is not the
same as performance and there are no basic processes set
in place to monitor this. Even if processes are introduced,
the question of how to implement this in the different
countries from where organisations source their products
remains. From this interviewee’s perspective, it is certainly
questionable whether the Act is effective in curbing slavery
and unethical practices and protecting human rights. There
was general concern over how disclosure can be connected
to the activities (if any) towards the elimination of modern
slavery. Requiring corporations to disclose, rather than to
act, in the hope that greater transparency and disclosures
about organisations’ activities will foster improvement in
working conditions may be misdirected. Prior research
in accounting showed that the voluntary nature of social
disclosure had the effect that social disclosures often do
not reflect the real actions and disclosure can be used to
maintain the existing hegemony and inequality as exposed
through counter-narratives by NGOs, civil society organisations and the media (Semeen & Islam, 2021; Islam et al.,
2021). Similarly, critical accounting research on transparency also found that transparency through corporate disclosures can be problematic (see, for example, Coslor, 2016;
Roberts, 2009). The apparent disconnection between antislavery disclosures and real actions by corporations, may
relate to the literature on organisational decoupling that
suggests that organisations may decouple their institutional

Modern Slavery Disclosure Regulation and Global Supply Chains: Insights from Stakeholder…

practices (such as disclosures practices) from their actual
organisational actions (Aguileraet al., 2007; Holder-Webb
& Cohen, 2012; Jamali, 2010; Lepoutre & Valente, 2012;
Sandholtz, 2012). Drawing on this literature, we argue that
the UK Modern Slavery Act creates a context within which
corporations’ decoupling via modern slavery disclosure
appears to be ceremonial or symbolic—which may render
a form of institutional ‘immunity’ to regulatory pressures
(Lepoutre & Valente, 2012). However, we do not rule out
the importance of a particular disclosure regulation if such
regulation contain substantive provisions for the companies
to be socially accountable.

Critical Factors in the Creation of Normativity
of the UK Modern Slavery Act
While prior normativity research often found that regulations via external guidance, standards, and codes led to the
creation of normativity (Buhmann, 2011; Chelli et al., 2018;
Manacorda, 2014), we argue that more research is necessary to support or challenge these findings and interpretation. A problem (which prior normativity research did not
address) arises when minimum compliance or disclosure
requirements do not create transparency. Critical factors in
the creation of normativity of the Act are presented next.
Awareness Building Efforts and the Need for Broader
Stakeholder Engagement
For many, the Act’s normativity seems to lie in it being a
starting point for dialogue, launching sensible conversations
and actions focussed on modern slavery. Several anti-slavery
activists observed that the Act has a long-term role to play,
including raising awareness and creating transparent corporate practices in relation to modern slavery. In particular, many argue that the Act stimulates awareness of corporate transparency about modern slavery within business
operations, including supply chain operations. Some also
believe the Act is a part of efforts to raise global awareness of modern slavery. One anti-slavery campaign actor (3)
stated the ‘good thing is this [is] a part of a global movement: Australia has come up with an Act [Modern Slavery
Act 2018], Germany is coming forward and other countries
[are] coming… this [is] a wide range of global awareness’.
The Act creates the necessity for awareness-building collaborations among professional groups. There is consensus
among anti-slavery activists about the need for corporations

471

to collaborate with NGOs and anti-slavery campaign organisations on training and raising awareness around assessing
and tackling modern slavery risks in supply chains. One of
our interviewees, a senior official from a UK-based accounting professional body, observed that since accountants and
auditors are usually engaged in producing organisational disclosures and assurance practices, the Modern Slavery Act
regime has implications for the profession. Accordingly, his
organisation is collaborating with civil society and human
rights bodies to run awareness-building training sessions
and workshops for accountants and auditors. There is also a
common view among interviewees that modern slavery is a
multidisciplinary issue, and it is expected that collaborations
among different professional and non-professional groups
– including accountants/auditors, lawyers, business executives, consultants, trade unions, labour rights activists and
other civil society groups – will emerge to create corporate
accountability in relation to modern slavery.
The normativity of the Act depends on how regulators
in a democratic society encourage greater engagement by
civil society actors to produce counter-narratives (Gallhofer
et al., 2006; Semeen & Islam, 2021), and foster change in
corporate transparency. Anti-slavery activists interviewed
believe that the UK Modern Slavery Act does enhance the
scope for NGOs, activist groups, and civil society organisations to monitor corporate behaviour and collaborate with
the business to solve the issues (i.e. Islam & Van Staden,
2018). One interviewee (anti-slavery campaign actor, 4)
provided an interesting insight: ‘following the Act, several
civil society organisations [have] come up with reporting
and evaluations or their scores against companies’ modern
slavery transparency so that the concerned companies do
not want to see bad scores in the future. Several other civil
society organisations directly engage and collaborate with
the business to tackle modern slavery’. An anti-slavery campaign actor (1) who is pushing the government for legislation that holds companies accountable stated ‘we are active
to hold companies liable for modern slavery, we are wanting government [to] take some solid action. A new Modern
Slavery Act review has been released last week and you can
see some of our recommendations. Our key recommendation
is to move towards monitoring and sanctions’. An ethical
investor regards the Act as helping to monitor companies
in the public domain: ‘our monitoring efforts (which also
depends on NGOs) is slow, but it is moving in a positive
direction. The Act is helpful to monitor and score companies
in terms of human rights. If you look at pension funds (larger

13

472

funds), we are concerned about the modern slavery issue
because pension funds should be socially responsible….’
At the implementation stage of the Act, NGOs’ or campaign groups’ roles are crucial. Some anti-slavery campaign
organisations have started ranking companies in terms of
the quality of their reporting. Some companies have been
ranked highly for reporting and a few were interviewed. One
responded, ‘I do not know whether it is best reporting or not,
but for sure, we have improved our quality of disclosures. We
have now greater transparency in supply chains’ (sustainability manager, UK retail company). From this discussion,
we argue that given the minimum disclosure requirements
of the Act, the creation of normativity largely depends on
NGOs and campaign organisations’ continued engagement
and collaboration with corporations and regulators. While
prior research on normativity found that along with regulation, external guidelines (for example, global guidelines such
as the GRI) are a precondition for sustaining normativity
(Buhmann, 2011; Chelli et al., 2018; Manacorda, 2014), we
provide additional insights that direct or indirect engagement
by NGOs and anti-slavery campaign organisations have a
greater promise to create normativity. While our research
adds to earlier research looking into the attainment of normativity (see Bebbington et al., 2012) and its relationship
with disclosures and transparency (Chauvey et al., 2015),
we argue that higher levels of normativity can be achieved if
NGOs and campaign groups are empowered and emphasise
public interest over corporate self-interest.
Conformance with the Act and Broader Community
Expectations
The normativity of regulation also depends on how the regulatory environment encourages regulated (companies) to
conform with broader community expectations. Chelli et al.
(2018) found that French environmental disclosure regulations and broader community expectations, as reflected by
the GRI guidelines, prompted the attainment of normativity.
We argue that not only global expectations but also local
(country-based) expectations, as reflected in NGO and activist narratives and accounts (Islam et al., 2021), are important contributing factors for the achievement of normativity. Accordingly, as mentioned earlier, some anti-slavery
campaign actors stated that the Act partly reflects broader
community expectations. This entails a level of normativity as, despite significant limitations, the Act has value or
appears relevant to the broader community, including NGOs

13

M. A. Islam, C. J. Van Staden

and activists. As modern slavery statements required by the
Act are publicly available on organisations’ websites, these
are available to consumers, media, NGOs, and investors, i.e.
key stakeholders can view them and evaluate them accordingly (anti-slavery campaign actor, 5). When interviewees
were asked whether the regulations help to obtain a sense
of normativity, a consensus view was expressed. One antislavery campaign actor (4) stated:
Yes, the Act has merit. The Act does make the modern
slavery statement publicly available. The more people
read the statement, the more serious companies would
be to provide objective information. If some people are
enquiring whether a company meets the requirement
and commenting on this accordingly, it does put pressure on companies to be responsive.
Some participants have addressed the normativity issue by
reviewing whether the Act meets the needs of the broader
community. They do not think the Act is ideal, but they also
think that the Act meets expectations to some extent as it has
some social value. As anti-slavery campaign actor (4) stated,
‘at least we have something to assess and score companies’
compliance [against]’. And interestingly, one manager from
an ethical investment company sees a significant advantage
of the Act in the following: ‘the Act helps us to assess and
score companies’ modern slavery performance. In line with
the Act, we assess the companies’ modern slavery statements
and provide our score and recommendation to our investee
who are eager to invest their money in a responsible manner.
I think this matter!
Activist Concerns over the Regulator’s Priority to Protect
Corporate Interests over the Public Interest
One of the critical factors that can limit normativity is the
regulator’s lack of power to protect the public interest. The
limits of the transparency provision under the Act and the
ongoing influence by powerful interest groups reduce the
normativity of the UK Modern Slavery Act. ‘There are, of
course, some issues that are associated with the demerits
of the Act’ (anti-slavery campaign actor, 2). ‘It is a type of
requirement that might encourage companies [to] provide
some superfluous disclosure on modern slavery without necessarily engaging in the real change or elimination of slavery’ (chief policy advisor, accounting body). Another problem was highlighted: ‘it is difficult to compare between two
companies even [where] both adopted the modern slavery

Modern Slavery Disclosure Regulation and Global Supply Chains: Insights from Stakeholder…

statement. In other words, it is difficult to differentiate good
and bad companies because apparently, based on reporting,
one may not find any difference. This can be risky for ethical
investors’ (manager, ethical investment firm).
The regulation setting process is a political process in
which the voices of powerful interest groups such as the
business community can be prioritised over civil society
groups. Accordingly, in relation to the provision of penalties for non-compliance with the Act, the government feared
that any provision for injunction or punishment would not
be accepted by the regulated and, therefore, might hamper
transparency. ‘[A] punitive approach might hamper transparency… we have not taken an injunction so far because
the issue of global supply is so complex’ (a government policy advisor). This statement is consistent with prior research
on the normativity of regulations that suggested that penalties for non-compliance should not be a necessary precondition of normativity (Chelli et al., 2018). But we argue that it
is the dominant business interests that suppressed punitive
actions against wrongdoers, which in turn suppress both normativity and transparency. From the interviews and reading around the subject, we detected a sense of resistance
from the regulated, i.e. the business community. There is
a view among anti-slavery activists that in order to protect
the interests of regulated organisations and not the workers
or victims, the government perhaps imposed a much more
user-friendly form of regulation. ‘The Act does not impose
any penalty even if a business does not produce any modern
slavery statement’ (anti-slavery campaign actor, 4).
All the critical factors that limit transparency, as discussed in earlier sections, have implications for normativity.
As one anti-slavery campaign actor (anti-slavery campaign
actor, 4) repeated, ‘if a company does not comply with the
Act, nothing will happen. But there should be legal demerit
to hold companies accountable.’ Some of these concerns
are antithetical to the notion of normativity as ‘the moral
bases of legality’ (Ewick & Silbey, 1998). This type of concern, along with variations in corporate responsiveness to
the regulations, might lead to the adoption of future punitive
tactics, including stringent regulation by regulators themselves (Ayres & Braithwaite, 1991). It follows then that if
certain provisions of a particular regulation are problematic to create transparency, this may also be problematic in
the creation of normativity. We discussed earlier that antislavery activists were concerned over the Act’s minimum
disclosure provisions. While a growing amount of prior
research on normativity (Buhmann, 2011; Chelli et al., 2018;

473

Manacorda, 2014) appeared supportive of minimum disclosure requirements, given that other guidance (i.e. from UN
guidelines to the GRI guidelines) played a role in the process
of achieving normativity, we find this notion problematic
because achieving normativity largely depends on how well
stakeholder activism, activist campaigns and social movements were mobilised to create transparency (Islam & Van
Staden, 2018). If the broader community or activist groups
do not put pressure upon companies to be socially accountable, minimum disclosure requirements alone may not create normativity. While our insights are not exhaustive, it is
important for further research on this issue.

Conclusion
This article provides essential insights into the views of
anti-slavery activists and experts on the UK modem slavery
Act of 2015 and its implications in relation to eliminating
modern slavery from global supply chains. Most of the interviewees of this study articulated cautious confidence in the
Act and its aims to foster corporate transparency and support
for the public interest and in the normativity of the Act. For
many interviewees, the Act is a starting point for broader
dialogue among stakeholder groups to encourage corporate
transparency in relation to modern slavery. There is a consensus view that the disclosure provisions of the Act may not
help to eliminate modern slavery in the shorter term but may
help to build long-term solutions. Other views see the Act as
having been influenced by powerful interest groups whose
motivations were business risk management rather than minimising the risk of people falling victim to modern slavery
in supply chains, mainly operated in developing nations. For
many interviewees, the constructive aspect of the Act will
be its normativity (Ewick & Silbey, 2003), which should
encourage ‘more’ scrutiny of regulated organisations by civil
society groups and human rights activists.
While the interviewees find the transparency provisions
of the UK Modern Slavery Act a persuasive concept, most
of them are also sceptical about the way the Act operationalise these. The call for transparency in the Act is restricted
by the limited disclosure requirements, limits to the range
of entities required to publish modern slavery statements
and limited means to hold regulated organisations responsible for their supply chain operations in developing nations.
While the call for transparency is an important yardstick to
measure corporate responsibility and sustainability (Gold

13

474

& Heikkurinen, 2018), it has been observed that limited
transparency requirements in the Act have led to limited
corporate liability and responsibility for tackling modern
slavery and unethical labour practices within global supply chains. In particular, the traceability of suppliers and
their factory locations is a critical aspect of transparency
within global supply chains (Egels-Zandén & Hansson,
2016; Gardner et al., 2019) that is disregarded in the Modern Slavery Act. Anti-slavery activists believe that the Act
has been influenced by corporations and some believe that
there is little legal scope to hold organisations accountable
for slavery practices. There is a view that the regulation has
been captured by powerful corporate groups for their own
interests (Baudot et al., 2017; Hantke-Domas, 2003; Hines,
1991; Levine & Forrence, 1990; Paisey & Paisey, 2012),
and that modern slavery disclosures, therefore, attempt to
reduce business risk and do not address and reduce the risks
of those falling victim to modern slavery. The interviewees
observed that risk minimisation agendas, among both regulators and corporations, may not automatically reduce the
severity of modern slavery practices within global supply
chains. Although the normativity of the Act can be achieved
(Ewick & Silbey, 2003) through collaboration with, and surveillance activities by, NGOs and anti-slavery activists, the
ascendance of corporate self-interest over public interest
may hamper normativity. Unlike prior research on normativity (Buhmann, 2011; Chelli et al., 2018; Manacorda, 2014),
we argue that the Act’s creation of normativity is constrained
by NGOs and activists’ capacity to mobilise pressures upon
companies to be socially accountable. In line with the literature on counter-accounts (Semeen & Islam, 2021; Lehman
et al., 2016; Gallhofer et al., 2006), we argue that the narratives of anti-slavery activists regarding unethical modern
slavery practices, play an important role to mobilise pressures upon corporations to follow the Act.
Through close observation of practices under the Modern
Slavery Act 2015, we contribute to the current understanding of the limitations of corporate transparency and related
regulation. First, we document not only the current limitations of transparency under the Act, but also the issues with
relational compliance with the (minimal) disclosure requirements within a supply chain setting. Second, although some
researchers provided a theoretical overview of the limits
of transparency and accountability (see, for example, Gold
& Heikkurinen, 2018), in this study, we have observed the
phenomena through interviews with social and institutional
actors who are knowledgeable in the area of corporate
responsibility in relation to modern slavery. Third, in line

13

M. A. Islam, C. J. Van Staden

with the literature on counter-accounts/narratives (Gallhofer
et al., 2006; Lehman et al., 2016), we observed how particular civil society groups, this being anti-slavery activists, produce narratives regarding the roles of regulators and corporate actors. Fourth, we also contribute to the understanding
of regulatory capture by highlighting how businesses seek to
minimise their own risk rather than show concern for victims
of modern slavery. Finally, we extend the knowledge about
normativity (Chelli et al., 2018) by providing new insights
into how the normativity of the Act largely depend on the
activism and campaigns by NGOs and anti-slavery groups.
We acknowledge that while we problematised transparency limitations of the UK Modern Slavery Act, we
mostly relied on the narratives of anti-slavery activists.
Our approach is consistent with the counter-account literature (Lehman et al., 2016; Gallhofer et al., 2006; Semeen
& Islam, 2021). Accordingly, we argue that, from a stakeholder/societal point of view, NGOs and social activists
are in a better position than profit-driven shareholders or
corporate managers to provide views and narratives on the
limitations of a particular regulation to create transparency
and ethical practices within global supply chains. We also
argue that while the expectations of NGOs and social activists may be seen as unrealistic by some corporate managers, these expectations can be emancipatory to the broader
community (including the victims of modern slavery within
global supply change) and a catalyst for future change in
corporate accountability. We encourage further research to
investigate the emancipatory roles of different stakeholder
groups, including anti-slavery activists, journalists, suppliers and workers, in global supply chains operating in the
developing world. Moreover, while existing modern slavery
disclosure regimes are new and emerging in nature, calling
on corporations to disclose rather than to act and the idea
that greater transparency and disclosures about organisations’ activities will foster improvement in working conditions, remains largely under-researched. Along these lines,
we also call for more research into new modern slavery disclosure regimes.

475

Modern Slavery Disclosure Regulation and Global Supply Chains: Insights from Stakeholder…

Appendix 1: Information on interviewees
Positions

Interview timing

Description of experience

Project lead, an anti-slavery and workers’
rights organisation

20th Nov 2018, 10–10.45 am

Head of sustainability policy, a UK retail
association

25th Nov 2018,
12.30–1.10 pm

Lead ethical and responsible investment
engagement, Ethical investment firm

17th January 2019, 3–4 pm

Head of slave-free business development,
Anti-slavery campaign organisation

25th January 2019, 10–11.30am

Director, an ethical investment firm

17th January 2019, 9.30–10.15 am

Director, slave-free supply chains, Anti-slavery campaign organisation

10th December 2018, 9.45–10.15 am

Leading a project on human rights in the supply
at a major global business and human rights
NGO
Co-chairing modern slavery strategy and implementation group – Transparency in supply
chains at a major retail association in the UK
Working as a research expert on modern slavery
at the UK’s major charity fund management
firm
Leading the business development at a UK
modern slavery NGO that is directly engaged
with businesses to tackle modern slavery
Senior director of shareholder advocacy at a
major religious-based investment services
company
Independent supply chain auditor and a director
of a UK modern slavery NGO that is directly
engaged with businesses to tackle modern
slavery
Leading different UK government projects in
relation to preventing modern slavery
Managing ethical compliance, a UK retail
company. S/he was responsible for preparing a modern slavery statement that was
subsequently ranked by a consultancy firm in
the top 3 modern slavery statements among
FT100
Working with a major NGO to run workshops
for members of an accounting professional
body in the UK; also, the author of an article
on the UK Modern Slavery Act 2015
Responsible for strategy and operations of
major civil society coalition (NGO) on corporate accountability. Also working for various
business and human rights projects
Working for various business and human
rights projects at major civil society coalition
(NGO) on corporate accountability
Director of an NGO and the independent auditor in UK companies’ supply chains operating
in developing countries
Working in various modern slavery projects at a
global ethical trading NGO
Responsible for the operations of an association of civil engineering contractors (many
contractors in the UK are engaged in supply
chain activities)

28th January 2019, 10.15–10.45 am
Head of modern slavery prevention, UK
Government
Ethical trading manager, a UK retail company 30th November 2018, 10–10.35 am

Senior policy advisor, A UK professional
accounting body

27th November 2018, 10–10.30 am

Director, Anti-slavery campaign organisation

15th November 2018, 4–4.30 pm

Policy advisor, Anti-slavery campaign organi- 25 January 2019 11–12 pm
sation
Director and independent auditor, Anti-slavery 28th November 2018, 10–11.30 am
campaign organisation
Modern slavery advisor and auditor, Antislavery campaign organisation
Chief Executive Officer, a UK civil contractors’ association

18th December 2018, 3–4 pm
18th January 2019, 10–10.30 am

Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank and acknowledge
CPA Australia for partially supporting their data collection.

Declarations
Conflict of interest There is no known conflict of interest associated
with this publication.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in

13

476
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.

References
Acerete, B., Gasca, M., & Llena, F. (2019). Analysis of environmental
financial reporting in the Spanish toll roads sector. Spanish Journal of Finance and Accounting, 48(4), 430–463.
Aguilera, R. V., Rupp, D. E., Williams, C. A., & Ganapathi, J. (2007).
Putting the S back in corporate social responsibility: A multilevel
theory of social change in organizations. Academy of Management Review, 32(3), 836–863.
Allain, J. (2017). Contemporary Slavery and Its Definition in Law.
Contemporary Slavery: Popular Rhetoric and Political Practice,
37–66.
Ansett, S. & Hantover, J. (2013). Bangladesh factory fires – the hidden
dangers of subcontracting” Ethical Corporation Magazine, 5th
February. Available from: http://​www.​ethic​alcorp.​com/​supply-​
chains/​bangl​adesh-​facto​ry-​fires-​E280%​93-​hidden-​dange​rs-​subco​
ntrac​ting
Arnold, D., & Hewison, K. (2005). Exploitation in global supply
chains: Burmese workers in Mae Sot. Journal of Contemporary
Asia, 35(3), 319–340.
Ayres, I., & Braithwaite, J. (1991). Tripartism: Regulatory capture and
empowerment. Law & Social Inquiry, 16(3), 435–496.
Barrientos, S., & Smith, S. (2007). Do workers benefit from ethical
trade? Assessing codes of labour practice in global production
systems”. Third World Quarterly, 28(4), 713–729.
Baier, M. (2016). Social and legal norms: Towards a socio-legal understanding of normativity. Routledge Matthias Baier. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​4324/​97813​15609​416
Barth, M., & Schipper, K. (2008). Financial reporting transparency.
Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance, 23(2), 173–190.
Baudot, L., Roberts, R. W., & Wallace, D. M. (2017). An examination
of the US public accounting profession’s public interest discourse
and actions in federal policymaking. Journal of Business Ethics,
142(2), 203–220.
Bauhr, M., & Nasiritousi, N. (2012). Resisting transparency: corruption, legitimacy, and the quality of global environmental policies.
Global Environmental Politics, 12(4), 9–29.
Bebbington, J., Kirk, E. A., & Larrinaga, C. (2012). The production
of normativity: a comparison of reporting regimes in Spain and
the UK. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 37(2), 78–94.
Berliner, D. (2014). The political origins of transparency. The Journal of Politics, 76(2), 479–491.
Bernstein, E. (2017). Making transparency transparent: The evolution of observation in management theory. Academy of Management Annals, 11(1), 217–266.
Birkey, R. N., Guidry, R. P., Islam, M. A., & Patten, D. M. (2018).
Mandated social disclosure: an analysis of the response to the
california transparency in supply chains act of 2010. Journal
of Business Ethics, 152(3), 827–841.
Blacconiere, W. G., & Northcut, W. D. (1997). Environmental information and market reactions to environmental legislation.
Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance, 12(2), 149–178.
Blacconiere, W. G., & Patten, D. M. (1994). Environmental disclosures, regulatory costs, and changes in firm value. Journal of
Accounting and Economics, 18(3), 357–377.
Blitz, B., & Simic, A. (2019). The modern slavery regime: A critical
evaluation. Journal of the British Academy, 7(Supp. 1), 1–34.

13

M. A. Islam, C. J. Van Staden
Bloomfield, M. & Lebaron, G. (2018). The UK Modern Slavery Act:
Transparency through Disclosure in Global Governance, Sep
2018, E-International Relations, https://​www.e-​ir.​info/​2018/​
09/​21/​t he-​uk-​modern-​slave​r y-​act-​trans​paren​cy-​t hrou​gh-​discl​
osure-​in-​global-​gover​nance/
Brusca, I., Grossi, G., & Manes-Rossi, F. (2018). Setting consolidated
reporting standards for local government. Public Money & Management, 38(7), 483–492.
Buell, R. W., Kim, T., & Tsay, C. (2017). Creating reciprocal value
through operational transparency. Management Science, 63(6),
1673–1695.
Buhmann, K. (2011). Integrating human rights in emerging regulation
of corporate social responsibility: The EU case. International
Journal of Law in Context, 7(2), 139–179.
Bushman, R. M., Piotroski, J. D., & Smith, A. J. (2004). What determines corporate transparency? Journal of Accounting Research,
42(2), 207–252.
Chalmers, J. (2013). Special Report: How textile kings weave a hold on
Bangladesh, Reuters, May, last viewed on May, 2021 at https://​
www.​reute​rs.​com/​artic​le/​us-​bangl​adesh-​garme​nts-​speci​al-​report-​
idUSB ​ R E941 ​ 1 CX20 ​ 1 30502? ​ f bclid= ​ I wAR1 ​ u koUa ​ 9 z3uM_
X5PODfIvQshtMRNLwplNGFlptPzwFAZcWcA80LUpc1DrU
Carpenter, D., & Moss, D. A. (Eds.). (2013). Preventing regulatory
capture: Special interest influence and how to limit it. Cambridge
University Press.
Chauvey, J. N., Giordano-Spring, S., Cho, C. H., & Patten, D. M.
(2015). The normativity and legitimacy of CSR disclosure: Evidence from France. Journal of Business Ethics, 130(4), 789–803.
Chelli, M., Durocher, S., & Fortin, A. (2018). Normativity in environmental reporting: a comparison of three regimes. Journal of
Business Ethics, 149(2), 285–311.
Chilton, A. S., & Sarfaty, G. A. (2017). The limitations of supply chain
disclosure regimes. Stanford Journal of International Law, 53,
1–54.
Christ, K. L., & Burritt, R. L. (2018). Current perceptions on the problem of modern slavery in business. Business Strategy & Development, 1(2), 103–114.
Coates, J. (2007). The goals and promise of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(1), 91–116.
Coslor, E. (2016). Transparency in an opaque market: Evaluative frictions between “thick” valuation and “thin” price data in the art
market. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 50, 13–26.
Crane, A. (2013). Modern slavery as a management practice: Exploring
the conditions and capabilities for human exploitation. Academy
of Management Review, 38(1), 49–69.
Dal Bó, E., & Di Tella, R. (2003). Capture by threat. Journal of Political Economy, 111(5), 1123–1154.
Dearden, L. (2018). UK’s first Independent Anti-Slavery Commissioner
resigns citing government interference, May 17 Independent,
https://​www.​indep​endent.​co.​uk/​news/​uk/​polit​ics/​modern-​slave​
ry-​uk-​commi​ssion​er-​resig​ns-​inter ​feren​ce-​kevin-​hyland-​gover​
nment-​a8356​601.​html
Doorey, D. J. (2011). The transparent supply chain: From resistance to
implementation at Nike and Levi-Strauss. Journal of Business
Ethics, 103(4), 587–603.
Egels-Zandén, N., & Hansson, N. (2016). Supply chain transparency
as a consumer or corporate tool The case of Nudie Jeans Co.
Journal of Consumer Policy, 39(4), 377–395.
Egels-Zandén, N., Hulthén, K., & Wulff, G. (2015). Trade-offs in supply chain transparency: The case of Nudie Jeans Co. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 107, 95–104.
Etzioni, A. (2009). The capture theory of regulations—revisited. Society, 46(4), 319–323.
Ewick, P., & Silbey, S. (2003). Narrating social structure: Stories of
resistance to legal authority. American Journal of Sociology,
108(6), 1328–1372.

Modern Slavery Disclosure Regulation and Global Supply Chains: Insights from Stakeholder…
Ewick, P. & Silbey, S. S. (1998). The commonplace of law: Stories from
everyday life. University of Chicago Press.
FEE (2017). Fast Fashion Has Changed the Industry and the Economy,
Foundation for Economic Education (FEE), July, last viewed on
May, 1, 2021, at https://​fee.​org/​artic​les/​fast-​fashi​on-​has-​chang​
ed-​the-​indus​try-​and-​the-​econo​my/
Fenster, M. (2010). Seeing the state: Transparency as metaphor. Administrative Law Review, 62(3), 617–672.
Finel, B. I., & Lord, K. M. (1999). The surprising logic of transparency.
International Studies Quarterly, 43(2), 325–339.
Ford, R. (2018). Anti-slavery tsar Kevin Hyland steps down amid criticism, 18 May, The Times, https://​www.​theti​mes.​co.​uk/​artic​le/​
anti-​slave​ry-​tsar-​attac​ks-​home-​office-​qrvhl​c3bl
Fung, A., Graham, M., & Weil, D. (2007). Full disclosure: The perils
and promise of transparency. Cambridge University Press.
Gadd, D., & Broad, R. (2018). Troubling recognitions in British
responses to modern slavery. The British Journal of Criminology, 58(6), 1440–1461.
Gallhofer, S., Haslam, J., Monk, E., & Roberts, C. (2006). The emancipatory potential of online reporting: The case of counter
accounting. Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal,
19(5), 681–718.
Gardner, T. A., Benzie, M., Börner, J., Dawkins, E., Fick, S., Garrett,
R., Godar, J., Grimard, A., Lake, S., Larsen, R. K., & Mardas,
N. (2019). Transparency and sustainability in global commodity
supply chains. World Development, 121, 163–177.
Gold, S., & Heikkurinen, P. (2018). Transparency fallacy: Unintended
consequences of stakeholder claims on responsibility in supply
chains. Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, 31(1),
318–337.
Gold, S., Trautrims, A., & Trodd, Z. (2015). Modern slavery challenges
to supply chain management. Supply Chain Management: An
International Journal, 20(5), 485–494.
Gray, G. C., & Silbey, S. S. (2014). Governing inside the organization:
Interpreting regulation and compliance. American Journal of
Sociology, 120(1), 96–145.
Grigorescu, A. (2003). International organizations and government
transparency: Linking the international and domestic realms.
International Studies Quarterly, 4(1), 643–667.
Hansard (2019), Modern Slavery Act: Independent Review, House of
Commons Hansard, June, 19, Vol. 662 (viewed at: https://​hansa​
rd.​parli​ament.​uk/​commo​ns/​2019-​06-​19/​debat​es/​66FD5​FFB-​
2058-​4CAE-​8B1F-​0EC4B​2E090​41/​Moder ​nSlav​eryAc​tInde​
pende​ntRev​iew)
Hantke-Domas, M. (2003). The public interest theory of regulation:
Non-existence or misinterpretation? European Journal of Law
and Economics, 15(2), 165–194.
Harnay, S., & Scialom, L. (2016). The influence of the economic
approaches to regulation on banking regulations: a short history of banking regulations. Cambridge Journal of Economics,
40(2), 401–426.
Heard-Lauréote, K. (2007). A transparency gap? The case of European
agricultural committee governance. Public Policy and Administration, 22(2), 239–258.
Hines, R. D. (1991). The FASB’s conceptual framework, financial
accounting and the maintenance of the social world. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 16(4), 313–331.
Holder-Webb, L., & Cohen, J. (2012). The Cut and Paste Society:
Isomorphism in Codes of Ethics. Journal of Business Ethics,
107(4), 485–509.
Hollyer, J. R., Rosendorff, B. P., & Vreeland, J. R. (2011). Democracy
and transparency. The Journal of Politics, 73(4), 1191–1205.
Home Office, (2015). Statutory guidance: Slavery and human trafficking in supply chains: guidance for businesses, Gov.UK, viewed
at https://​www.​gov.​uk/​gover ​nment/​publi​catio​ns/ transparencyin-supply-chains-a-practical-guide; full report at: https://​assets.​

477

publi​shing.​servi​ce.​gov.​uk/​gover ​nment/​uploa​ds/​system/​uploa​ds/​
attac​hment_​data/​file/​649906/​Trans​paren​cy_​in_​Supply_​Chains_​
A_​Pract​ical_​Guide_​2017.​pdf
Home Office (2019). Independent Review of the Modern Slavery Act
2015 second Interim Report: Transparency in Supply chains,
viewed at: https://​assets.​publi​shing.​servi​ce.​gov.​uk/ government/
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/796500/FINAL_
Independent_MSA_Review_Interim_Report_2_-_TISC.pdf
Hughes, A., Buttle, M., & Wrigley, N. (2007). Organisational geographies of corporate responsibility: A UK–US comparison of
retailers’ ethical trading initiatives. Journal of Economic Geography: Transnational Retail, Supply Networks, and the Global,
7(4), 491–513.
International Labor Organization (ILO) and Walk Free Foundation.
(2017). Global Estimates of Modern Slavery: Forced Labour and
Forced Marriage, ILO and Walk Free Foundation https://​www.​
ilo.​org/​wcmsp5/​g roups/​publi​c/---​dgrep​orts/---​dcomm/​docum​
ents/​publi​cation/​wcms_​575479.​pdf
Islam, M. A. (2018). Tackling Modern Slavery: What Role Can
Accountants Play? Audit & Assurance, International Federation
of Accountants (IFAC), see on this link: https://​www.​ifac.​org/​
global-​knowl​edgeg​ateway/​audit-​assur​ance/​discu​ssion/​tackl​ing-​
modern-​slave​ry-​what-​role-​can
Islam, M. A., & Deegan, C. (2010). Media pressures and corporate disclosure of social responsibility performance information: A study
of two global clothing and sports retail companies. Accounting
and Business Research, 40(2), 131–148.
Islam, M. A., Deegan, C., & Haque, S. (2021). Corporate human rights
performance and moral power: A study of retail MNCs’ supply
chains in Bangladesh. Critical Perspectives on Accounting, 74,
102163.
Islam, M. A., & McPhail, K. (2011). Regulating for corporate human
rights abuses: The emergence of corporate reporting on the ILO’s
human rights standards within the global garment manufacturing
and retail industry. Critical Perspectives on Accounting, 22(8),
790–810.
Islam, M. A., & Van Staden, C. J. (2018). Social movement NGOs and
the comprehensiveness of conflict mineral disclosures: Evidence
from global companies. Accounting, Organizations and Society,
65, 1–19.
Islam, M. A., Deegan, C., & Gray, R. (2018). Social compliance audits
and multinational corporation supply chain: Evidence from a
study of the rituals of social audits. Accounting and Business
Research, 48(2), 190–224.
Jackson, J. (2018). Norms, normativity, and the legitimacy of justice
institutions: International perspectives. Annual Review of Law
and Social Science, 14, 145–165.
Jamali, D. (2010). MNCs and international accountability standards
through an institutional lens: evidence of symbolic conformity or
decoupling. Journal of Business Ethics, 95, 717–640.
Kasperkevic, J. (2016). Rana Plaza collapse: workplace dangers persist
three years later, reports find. The Guardian, May 31, https://​
www.​thegu​ardian.​com/​busin​ess/​2016/​may/​31/​rana-​plaza-​bangl​
adesh-​colla​pse-​fashi​on-​worki​ng-​condi​tions.
Kelly, A. (2014). Supermarket giants in Thailand for prawn slavery
talks. The Guardian, 30 July https://​www.​t hegu​ardian.​com/​
global-​devel​opment/​2014/​jul/​30/​super​marke​ts-​thail​and-​prawn-​
slave​ry-​seafo​od.
Kim, S., & Muldoon, C. (2015). The dodd-frank wall street reform and
consumer protection act: accomplishments and shortcomings.
The Journal of Applied Business and Economics, 17(3), 92–107.
KPMG. (2017). The KPMG Survey of Corporate Responsibility
Reporting 2017. viewed at: https://​home.​kpmg/​conte​nt/​dam/​
kpmg/​xx/​pdf/​2017/​10/​kpmg-​survey-​of-​corpo​rate-​respo​nsibi​
lity-​repor​ting-​2017.​pdf

13

478
KPMG. (2008). The KPMG Survey of Corporate Responsibility
Reporting 2008. viewed at: http://​s3.​amazo​naws.​com/​zanran_​
stora​ge/​www.​kpmg.​bg/​Conte​ntPag​es/​45691​987.​pdf
Landau, I., & Marshall, S. (2018). Should Australia be embracing the
modern slavery model of regulation? Federal Law Review, 46(2),
313–339.
Larrinaga, C., Carrasco, F., Correa, C., Llena, F., & Moneva, J. (2002).
Accountability and accounting regulation: The case of the Spanish environmental disclosure standard. European Accounting
Review, 11(4), 723–740.
LeBaron, G., & Rühmkorf, A. (2019). The domestic politics of corporate accountability legislation: Struggles over the 2015 UK
Modern Slavery Act. Socio-Economic Review, 17(3), 709–743.
Lepoutre, J., & Valente, M. (2012). Fools breaking out: the role of
symbolic and material immunity in explaining institutional nonconformity. Academy of Management Journal, 55(2), 285–313.
Levine, M. E., & Forrence, J. L. (1990). Regulatory capture, public
interest, and the public agenda: Toward a synthesis. Journal of
Law, Economics, and Organization, 6, 167–198.
Lehman, C., Annisette, M., & Agyemang, G. (2016). Immigration and
neoliberalism: Three cases and counter accounts. Accounting,
Auditing & Accountability Journal, 29(1), 43–79.
Malsch, B., & Salterio, S. E. (2016). Doing good field research: Assessing the quality of audit field research. Auditing A Journal of
Practice & Theory, 35(1), 1–22.
Manacorda, S. (2014). Towards an Anti-Bribery Compliance Model:
Methods and Strategies for a “Hybrid Normativity”. In Preventing Corporate Corruption (pp. 3–30). Springer.
Mehra, A., & Shay, K. (2016). Corporate responsibility and accountability for modern forms of slavery. Journal of International
Criminal Justice, 14(2), 453–468.
Meijer, A. (2009). Understanding modern transparency. International
Review of Administrative Sciences, 75(2), 255–269.
Miles, M. B. & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis:
An expanded sourcebook. Sage
Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M. & Saldaña, J. (2014). Qualitative
data analysis: An expanded sourcebook ­( 2 nd edition): Sage
publications.
Neu, D., Saxton, G., Everett, J., & Rahaman, A. S. (2020). Speaking
truth to power: Twitter reactions to the Panama Papers. Journal
of Business Ethics, 162(2), 473–485.
New, S. J. (2015). Modern slavery and the supply chain: The limits
of corporate social responsibility? Supply Chain Management:
An International Journal, 20(6), 697–707.
Nolan, J. (2017). Business and human rights: The challenge of
putting principles into practice and regulating global supply
chains. Alternative Law Journal, 42(1), 42–46.
Oxfam (2018). Richest 1 percent bagged 82 percent of wealth created
last- poorest half of humanity got nothing. January, last viewed
on May, 1, 2021 at https://​www.​oxfam.​org/​en/​press-​relea​ses/​
riche​st-1-​perce​nt-​bagged-​82-​perce​nt-​wealth-​creat​ed-​last-​year-​
poore​st-​half-​human​ity
Paisey, C., & Paisey, N. J. (2012). Whose rights? Professional discipline and the incorporation of a (human) rights framework:
The case of ICAS. Critical Perspectives on Accounting, 23(1),
17–35.
Phillips, N. (2015). Private governance and the problem of trafficking
and slavery in global supply chains. In Vulnerability, Exploitation and Migrants (pp. 15–27). Palgrave Macmillan, London.
Pinto, J. G. (2009). Transparency policy initiatives in Latin America:
Understanding policy outcomes from an institutional perspective. Communication and Law Policy, 14(1), 41–71.
Rahman, M., Khanam, R., & Absar, N. (1999). Child labor in Bangladesh: a critical appraisal of Harkin’s Bill and the MOUtype schooling program. Journal of Economic Issues, 33(4),
985–1003.

13

M. A. Islam, C. J. Van Staden
Roberts, J. (2009). No one is perfect: The limits of transparency and
an ethic for ‘intelligent’ accountability. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 34(8), 957–970.
Rogerson, M., Crane, A., Soundararajan, V., Grosvold, J., & Cho,
C. H. (2020). Organisational responses to mandatory modern
slavery disclosure legislation: A failure of experimentalist
governance? Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal,
33(7), 1505–1534.
Rosenfeld, J., & Denice, P. (2015). The power of transparency: Evidence from a British workplace survey. American Sociological
Review, 80(5), 1045–1068.
Roshitsh, K. (2021). U.K. Modern Slavery Act Isn’t Working as
Intended, Expert Alleges. WWD, March, viewed on May, 3,
2021 at https://​wwd.​com/​susta​inabi​lity/​busin​ess/u-​k-​modern-​
slave​r y-​a ct-​i snt-​worki​n g-​a s-​i nten​d ed-​expert-​a lleg​e s-​1 2347​
80434/
Qian, C., Gao, X., & Tsang, A. (2015). Corporate philanthropy, ownership type, and financial transparency. Journal of Business
Ethics, 130(4), 851–867.
Quaak, L., Aalbers, T., & Goedee, J. (2007). Transparency of corporate social responsibility in Dutch breweries. Journal of Business Ethics, 76(3), 293–308.
Sandholtz, K. W. (2012). Making Standards Stick: A Theory of Coupled vs. Decoupled Compliance. Organization Studies, 33(5/6),
655–678.
Sarat, A., & Kearns, T. (1993). Law in Everyday Life. University of
Michigan Press.
Senn, J., & Giordano-Spring, S. (2020). The limits of environmental
accounting disclosure: Enforcement of regulations, standards
and interpretative strategies. Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, 33(6), 1367–1393.
Schmidt, M. F. & Rakoczy, H. (2018) Developing an understanding of normativity. The Oxford Handbook of 4E Cognition,
pp.685–706.
Semeen, H. & Islam, M. A. (2021). Social impact disclosure and
symbolic power: Evidence from UK fair trade organizations.
Critical Perspectives on Accounting, 102182.
Sobik, J. (2020). Five years after the UK Modern Slavery Act, it’s
time to ramp it up. Anti-Slavery, March viewed on May, 3,
2021 at https://​w ww.​a ntis​l avery.​o rg/​fi ve-​years-​u k-​m odern-​
slave​r y-​act/
Squire Patton Boggs. (2015). The Modern Slavery Act 2015: 10 Key
Points for Businesses – What is this New Disclosure Obligation? Available at: https://​w ww.​g loba​l supp​lycha​i nlaw​b log.​
com/​files/​2015/​09/​20453-​Modern-​Slave​r y-​Act-​Alert.​pdf (Last
Accessed: 30/09/2018)
Steiner-Dicks, K. (2019). We know most global companies have
modern slavery in their supply chains. Ethical Corporation, August, 6, viewed at: http://​w ww.​e thic​a lcorp.​c om/​
we- ​ k now- ​ m ost- ​ g lobal- ​ c ompa ​ n ies- ​ h ave- ​ m oder n- ​ s lave​
ry-​their-​supply-​chains
Steinfield, C., Markus, M. L., & Wigand, R. T. (2011). Through a
glass clearly: Standards, architecture, and process transparency
in global supply chains. Journal of Management Information
Systems, 28(2), 75–108.
Stevenson, M., & Cole, R. (2018). Modern slavery in supply chains:
A secondary data analysis of detection, remediation and disclosure. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal,
12(3), 81–99.
The Barrister (2019). Modern Slavery Legislation: companies should
not ignore the possibility of UK suppliers as a modern slavery
risk. Sep 2, The Barrister, viewed at http://​www.​barri​sterm​
agazi​ne.​com/​modern-​slave​r y-​legis​lation-​compa​nies-​should-​
not-​ignore-​the-​possi​bility-​of-​uk-​suppl​iers-​as-a-​modern-​slave​
ry-​r isk/

Modern Slavery Disclosure Regulation and Global Supply Chains: Insights from Stakeholder…
The Global Slavery Index (2018). United Kingdom, 2018 Slavery
Index, viewed at https://​w ww.​globa​l slav​e ryin​d ex.​o rg/​2 018/​
findi​ngs/​count​r y-​studi​es/​united-​kingd​om/
Turner, R. J. (2016). Transnational supply chain regulation: Extraterritorial regulation as corporate law’s new frontier. Melbourne
Journal of International Law, 7, 188–209.
The Guardian (2015). The UK’s new slavery laws explained: what do
they mean for business? Dec 14, Viewed at: https://​www.​thegu​
ardian.​com/​susta​inable-​busin​ess/​2015/​dec/​14/​modern-​slave​r y-​
act-​expla​ined-​busin​ess-​respo​nsibi​lity-​supply-​chain
UK Government. (2016). Defeating modern slavery. article by Theresa May, Home Office, viewed at https://​www.​gov.​uk/​gover​
nment/​speec​hes/​defea​ting-​modern-​slave​r y-​there​sa-​may-​artic​le

479

Wilson, C. E., Morrison, T. H., Everingham, J. A., & McCarthy, J.
(2018). Capture and crush: Gas companies in the fracking dispute and deliberative depoliticization. Geoforum, 92, 106–116.
Zhu, K. (2004). Information transparency of business-to-business electronic markets: A game-theoretic analysis. Management Science,
50(5), 670–685.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

13

