Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
Modern slavery challenges to supply chain management
Stefan Gold, Alexander Trautrims, Zoe Trodd,

Article information:
To cite this document:
Stefan Gold, Alexander Trautrims, Zoe Trodd, (2015) "Modern slavery challenges to supply chain management", Supply Chain
Management: An International Journal, Vol. 20 Issue: 5, pp.485-494, https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-02-2015-0046
Permanent link to this document:
https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-02-2015-0046

Downloaded by University of Nottingham At 06:12 31 October 2018 (PT)

Downloaded on: 31 October 2018, At: 06:12 (PT)
References: this document contains references to 65 other documents.
To copy this document: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
The fulltext of this document has been downloaded 8611 times since 2015*

Users who downloaded this article also downloaded:
(2011),"“Supply Chain 2.0”: managing supply chains in the era of turbulence", International Journal of Physical Distribution
&amp; Logistics Management, Vol. 41 Iss 1 pp. 63-82 <a href="https://doi.org/10.1108/09600031111101439">https://
doi.org/10.1108/09600031111101439</a>
(2014),"Supply chain relationships, supplier support programmes and stimulating investment: evidence from the Armenian
dairy sector", Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, Vol. 19 Iss 1 pp. 98-107 <a href="https://doi.org/10.1108/
SCM-12-2012-0380">https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-12-2012-0380</a>

Access to this document was granted through an Emerald subscription provided by emerald-srm:311681 []

For Authors
If you would like to write for this, or any other Emerald publication, then please use our Emerald for Authors service
information about how to choose which publication to write for and submission guidelines are available for all. Please visit
www.emeraldinsight.com/authors for more information.

About Emerald www.emeraldinsight.com
Emerald is a global publisher linking research and practice to the benefit of society. The company manages a portfolio of
more than 290 journals and over 2,350 books and book series volumes, as well as providing an extensive range of online
products and additional customer resources and services.
Emerald is both COUNTER 4 and TRANSFER compliant. The organization is a partner of the Committee on Publication Ethics
(COPE) and also works with Portico and the LOCKSS initiative for digital archive preservation.
*Related content and download information correct at time of download.

Modern slavery challenges to supply chain
management
Stefan Gold
International Centre for Corporate Social Responsibility, Nottingham University Business School, Nottingham, UK

Alexander Trautrims
Operations Management and Information Systems, Nottingham University Business School, Nottingham, UK, and

Zoe Trodd

Downloaded by University of Nottingham At 06:12 31 October 2018 (PT)

American and Canadian Studies, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
Abstract
Purpose – This paper aims to draw attention to the challenges modern slavery poses to supply chain management. Although many international
supply chains are (most often unknowingly) connected to slave labour activities, supply chain managers and researchers have so far neglected the
issue. This will most likely change as soon as civil society lobbying and new legislation impose increasing litigation and reputational risks on
companies operating international supply chains.
Design/methodology/approach – The paper provides a definition of slavery; explores potentials for knowledge exchange with other disciplines;
discusses management tools for detecting slavery, as well as suitable company responses after its detection; and outlines avenues for future research.
Findings – Due to a lack of effective indicators, new tools and indicator systems need to be developed that consider the specific social, cultural
and geographical context of supply regions. After detection of slavery, multi-stakeholder partnerships, community-centred approaches and supplier
development appear to be effective responses.
Research limitations/implications – New theory development in supply chain management (SCM) is urgently needed to facilitate the
understanding, avoidance and elimination of slavery in supply chains. As a starting point for future research, the challenges of slavery to SCM are
conceptualised, focussing on capabilities and specific institutional context.
Practical implications – The paper provides a starting point for the development of practices and tools for identifying and removing slave labour
from supply chains.
Originality/value – Although representing a substantial threat to current supply chain models, slavery has so far not been addressed in SCM
research.
Keywords Slavery, Human rights, Labour rights, Supply chain auditing, Supply chain collaboration, Supply chain compliance
Paper type Viewpoint

Introduction

the International Labour Organization (ILO) (including the 10
per cent of slaves who are in state-imposed enslavement), while
only 22 per cent are in forced sexual exploitation (ILO, 2012a).
Most slaves are used in simple, non-technological, traditional
work: agriculture, brick-making, mining and quarrying, textile
manufacture, leather working, gem-working and jewellerymaking, cloth and carpet-making, domestic service, forest
clearing and charcoal-making (Bales and Trodd, 2013). As
well, the focus on trafficking ignores the majority of slaves who
were enslaved without being trafficked. By recent ILO
numbers, only 29 per cent of slaves crossed borders. Another
15 per cent were moved within their countries and 56 per cent
were not moved at all (ILO, 2012a).
By shifting our focus from sex trafficking to labour slavery,
we are able to shift our attention to supply chains. Slavery
taints numerous of our raw materials, commodities and goods.
International supply chains driven by the principle of
comparative cost advantages find their way to this slave labour
(and might even be seen as nourishing it) (cf. Lund-Thomsen

In 2014, the Global Slavery Index (GSI) counted 35.8 million
slaves worldwide. Although slavery is officially outlawed
everywhere, this estimate is the highest absolute number of
slaves in the history of mankind. The most affected countries
are India, China, Pakistan, Uzbekistan, Russia, Nigeria, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Indonesia, Bangladesh
and Thailand (Walk Free Foundation, 2014, GSI), though
slavery is by no means limited to Africa and Asia: the GSI
estimates over half a million slaves within the European Union
(Walk Free Foundation, 2014, GSI)[1].
Although much of the public debate on modern slavery circles
around the topics of trafficking and sexual exploitation, the
majority of slaves are in forced labour: 78 per cent, according to

The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on
Emerald Insight at: www.emeraldinsight.com/1359-8546.htm

Received 2 February 2015
Revised 28 May 2015
17 June 2015
Accepted 17 June 2015

Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
20/5 (2015) 485–494
© Emerald Group Publishing Limited [ISSN 1359-8546]
[DOI 10.1108/SCM-02-2015-0046]

485

Downloaded by University of Nottingham At 06:12 31 October 2018 (PT)

Modern slavery challenges

Supply Chain Management: An International Journal

Stefan Gold, Alexander Trautrims and Zoe Trodd

Volume 20 · Number 5 · 2015 · 485–494

and Lindgreen, 2014). Supply chains leverage the profitable
exploitation of cheap human resources – facilitated by global
inequality and hierarchical social relations (LeBaron, 2015) –
for the production of goods to be sold on the world market.
While this constant striving to reduce costs is inherent to many
supply chains, in the case of slave labour, slave-holders retain
the bulk of the profits, which never reach actors further down
the supply chain because the origin of slave-made
commodities is concealed (Datta and Bales, 2013).
Slave-made commodities are inseparably mixed up with
commodities of other provenance at the next supply chain tier
down towards the consumer, for example at the exporter or
wholesaler level. Slave labour therefore appears to be largely
hidden from focal companies predominantly placed in the big
consumer markets of the industrialised world.
However, non-governmental organisations (NGOs) might
blame focal companies for deliberately not trying hard enough
to detect those exploitative practices (Wolf, 2014). As supply
chains are internationally connected and highly outsourced
today, the risk of using slave labour somewhere in the supply
chain is present in almost all industries, from electronics,
high-tech, automotive and steel to agriculture, seafood,
mining, garment and textiles (David et al., 2012). One
illustrative real-world example of how slavery affects global
supply chains and threatens the brand reputation of focal
companies is the case of European and US supermarkets
(including Carrefour, Tesco and Walmart) selling prawns
produced with slave labour. In 2014, the Thai supplier
Charoen Pokphand Foods was accused of utilising fishmeal
stemming from fishing boats operated by slaves on their prawn
farms (Hodal et al., 2014). Public pressure forced the
supermarkets to remove this supplier’s prawn products from
their shelves.
In recent years, legislators have started to address this issue.
As early as 2005, the Brazilian Government launched a
voluntary multi-stakeholder initiative (MSI) called the
National Pact for the Eradication of Slave Labour (2005) in
collaboration with the ILO. It engages signatory companies in
attempts to eradicate slave labour from their supply chains:
they must cut ties with businesses that make use of slavery,
incorporate contractual clauses associated with practices that
characterise slavery and implement mechanisms to track
products. The Pact’s committee also offers free training on
slavery to employees of signatory companies and their
suppliers. More than 400 companies have joined so far, with
supply chain studies undertaken every three years at the
government’s request by the ILO, NGOs and trade unions.
Brazil’s Ministry of Labour also publishes a “dirty list” (Lisa
Suja do Trabalho Escravo) that it updates every six months,
listing the names of individuals and corporations deemed
responsible for situations of slavery, subjecting them to
sanctions (such as preventing them from accessing public
funds). The list goes to public service agencies and banks so
that they can deny finance, grants and public credit to those
listed. New legislation is also holding companies accountable
in the USA. Since 2012, the California Transparency in Supply
Chains Act requires big companies who are doing business in
California to report on their efforts to abolish slavery and human
trafficking in their supply chains[2]. In the UK, a Modern
Slavery Bill (2015) became law in March 2015, requiring

companies to prepare and make publically available a statement
every financial year that explains the steps taken to ensure that
slavery is not taking place in any of its supply chains[3]. And at
the level of international law, in June 2014, the ILO revised its
Convention on Forced or Compulsory Labour to address the still
existing implementation gaps (Pollitt, 2014).
Therefore, the use of slave labour (including by
beyond-first-tier suppliers) becomes a considerable legal risk
for focal companies. The avoidance of expensive and
reputation-damaging litigation might be seen as a crucial task,
similar to the obligation to report on conflict metals including
tin, tantalum, tungsten and gold by the Dodd–Frank financial
reforms act in the USA. Although there is no fine for having
conflict minerals in the supply chain, the act is a de facto ban
on those materials, at least for companies susceptible to
naming and shaming (Bosco and Munck, 2013). Industry has
responded through initiatives like the Conflict Free Smelter
Program, which uses third-party audits at smelters and
refineries since 2010 to ensure conflict-free provenance of
minerals supplied to the world market (Bafilemba et al.,
2014). Following the traditional managerial paradigm of profit
maximisation, the investments in ensuring a slavery-free
supply chain trade-off against the risks of litigation and
reputation damage. From this point of view, government
regulation and risk minimisation drive SCM (Magnan et al.,
2011; CIPS-Walk Free, 2013). But a distinctive strategy of
marketing sustainable products for a premium price may also
incentivise companies to ensure that their supply chains are
slavery-free (Seuring and Müller, 2008).
Against this background, we ask the following questions
relevant for academic research and supply chain practice: How
should we define slavery today? Avoiding slave labour in
supply chains requires knowing what the term entails and how
it is legally defined. Then, recognising that we can only
approach the problem of slavery in our supply chains if we
really understand the phenomenon, including insights from
other disciplines that have been researching slavery from
various angles over the past 15 years, we ask: What can supply
chain research learn from other disciplines about slavery in
supply chains? Subsequently, we turn to the issue of how to
improve the current situation by taking suitable actions
concerning SCM: Which management tools and indicator
systems might be suitable for detecting slavery within
international supply chains? and What is a suitable response
by a focal company when it detects slavery at any point in its
upstream supply chain? We provide insights through current
best-practice examples of detecting and responding to slavery
in supply chains. Finally, we conclude by asking: Which
avenues for future research would facilitate a better
understanding of the problem and support supply chain
managers in formulating an adequate response? The
remainder of the paper is structured around these research
questions.
Defining slavery
The definition of slavery has been controversial since the early
days of the modern anti-slavery movement in the 1990s, but
we recommend the definition put forward in the Bellagio–
Harvard Guidelines on the Legal Parameters of Slavery, written
by the Members of the Research Network on the Legal
486

Modern slavery challenges

Supply Chain Management: An International Journal

Stefan Gold, Alexander Trautrims and Zoe Trodd

Volume 20 · Number 5 · 2015 · 485–494

Parameters of Slavery in 2012. The Guidelines use the legal
definition of slavery found in the 1926 Slavery Convention,
which defines slavery in international law as “the status or
condition of a person over whom any or all of the powers
attaching to the right of ownership are exercised”
(Bellagio-Harvard Guidelines, 2012, p. 1). As slavery is banned
in every country of the world, slave-holders can no longer rely
on law to enforce ownership. Instead, the Guidelines explain,
they exercise the powers attaching to the right of ownership
through possession: “control over a person by another such as
a person might control a thing”. Therefore, “slavery” in its
contemporary form, as a by-product of our global production
system, may be defined as controlling a person:

What can supply chain research learn from other
disciplines about slavery in supply chains?
Despite being new to the supply chain agenda, slavery has
been a research topic in many other areas of social sciences
and humanities, including law, sociology, geography, politics,
literature, visual culture, international development and
history (Allain, 2009; Bales et al., 2009; Breman, 2007;
Barrientos et al., 2013). To explore how to detect and remove
slave labour from supply chains, SCM research can build on
the knowledge from these disciplines. For example, knowledge
from the fields of history and area studies is crucial for
identifying instances of slave labour. Slave-traders use local
beliefs and traditions to gain control over individuals – as in
Niger, Mauritania, Ghana, Thailand, Nigeria and China,
where differences of race, ethnicity and religion still form the
dividing lines between being slave and free. India still has an
internal Hindu “caste” system. The segregated people of the
lowest caste, the “dalit”, are denied access to work, education
and land and form a large proportion of the country’s slaves.
In Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, Muslim Arabs enslave the
minority Nigerian Muslims, Filipino Christians and Sri
Lankan Hindus. In fact, around the world, individuals who
belong to marginalised groups – whether indigenous peoples,
tribal groups, refugees or migrants – are targeted for trafficking
and enslavement (Bales et al., 2009).
In another example, the interdisciplinary field of
environmental studies – encompassing geography, law,
economics, politics and sociology – might help to underpin a
risk-based approach in monitoring supply chains for slavery.
Slavery thrives amid the chaos of natural disaster and
environmental destruction, and slavery in turn fuels a
destruction of the natural environment. In the Indian state of
Uttar Pradesh, thousands of slaves working in stone quarries
destroy the environment. They are forced to cut down forests
for the minerals underneath, and mining erodes any remaining
soil. Even if the slaves escape, the devastated natural
environment offers no way to make a living. Within this cycle,
they are then more vulnerable to slave-traders, who in turn
press slaves to wreck the environment still further. Around the
world, forests, reefs, coastal environments and protected areas
are destroyed by slave labour (Bales et al., 2009; Bales, 2016).
Knowledge from these diverse disciplines has the potential
to inform developmental approaches to eliminate slavery from
the local labour market and local suppliers. It is also essential
for the training of sourcing specialists and the development of
procurement procedures. In addition, the legal definition of
slavery, the evidence requirements for slavery litigation and
the strictness of liability are within the remit of policy-making
and interpretation in legal practice, but will have an impact on
supply chain auditing and supplier selection: the required
levels of supply chain monitoring and the extent to which
responsibility might increase with a company’s size, resources
and brand visibility. Table I outlines the potential relevance of
other research disciplines to SCM research and practice.

Downloaded by University of Nottingham At 06:12 31 October 2018 (PT)

[. . .] in such a way as to significantly deprive that person of his or her
individual liberty, with the intent of exploitation through the use,
management, purchase, sale, profit, transfer or disposal of that person
(Bellagio-Harvard Guidelines, 2012, p. 2).

This definition captures the reality of slavery: slaves are under
violent control and are paid nothing beyond subsistence. They
have lost free will and free movement; are economically
exploited; and no longer have control over the nature,
environment and conditions of their work. Building on this
definition, we define slavery in supply chains as the
exploitation of a person who is deprived of individual liberty
anywhere along the supply chain, from raw material extraction
to the final customer, for the purpose of service provision or
production.
Slavery mainly takes three forms today:
1 chattel slavery, in which people are born, captured or sold
into permanent slavery;
2 debt bondage slavery, in which people pledge themselves
against loans for an undefined length of time, but their
labour does not diminish the debt due to extortionate
interest rates or false accounting; and
3 contract slavery, where fake employment contracts lure
workers into the trafficking and enslavement process
(Bales and Trodd, 2013).
Debt bondage slavery and contract slavery can be hard for
supply chain managers to spot even if audits are carried out, as
slave-holders use commonly occurring business mechanisms
(e.g. loans and contracts) to hide the enslavement.
As global supply chains are operating under multiple legal and
cultural value systems (Lund-Thomsen and Lindgreen, 2014),
slavery can appear in various forms in a supply chain, which
makes its identification more challenging and also requires an
understanding of local contexts. Centralised supply chain
monitoring from an organisation’s headquarters – although
useful for many supply chain processes like quality control and
tracking deliveries – is prone to struggle with slavery
identification. Within contract slavery, in particular, it is more
difficult to determine a clear division between free and unfree
labour. Contract slavery – in contrast to chattel slavery – involves
an exchange of money that induces workers to journey to their
new place of work. But when mechanisms are in place to stop
them from withdrawing their work – they cannot leave, they are
not paid and their passports or legal documents have been
taken – they are in an unfree labour situation.

Management tools and indicator systems for
mitigating slavery in supply chains
SCM can use existing research from these other disciplines into
the specific social, cultural and geographical contexts of slavery –
i.e. the broader institutional setting (Crane, 2013) – to develop
487

Modern slavery challenges

Supply Chain Management: An International Journal

Stefan Gold, Alexander Trautrims and Zoe Trodd

Volume 20 · Number 5 · 2015 · 485–494

Downloaded by University of Nottingham At 06:12 31 October 2018 (PT)

Table I Connecting research on slavery from other disciplines to SCM research and practice
Discipline

Relevant research

Link to SCM

Finance/Accounting
Law
Development studies
Area studies/Sociology
Environmental studies
Political science
Foreign policy

Auditing systems
Legal definitions of slavery; prosecution of slave-holders
Causes and reduction of poverty
Race/ethnicity/religion/caste as factors in enslavement
Environmental destruction as a factor in enslavement
Evolution of political and judicial systems
International sanctions

Economics
History

Economics of contemporary slave trade/slavery
Historic slave trade and its elimination

Monitoring suppliers; compliance systems
Legal evidence for slavery; litigation risk
Indicators for slavery in a geographical region
Indicators for slavery in a geographical region
Indicators for slavery in a geographical region
Collaboration with local justice systems
Disruption risk from sanctions against countries that form
part of global supply chain network
Indicators for slavery in a geographical region
Approaches to eradicate slavery from supply chains,
interrupting the supply of slaves, past campaigns for
morally informed consumption and product boycotts

what is even more important is the fact that practices of
sustainable SCM in general have little effect when dealing
with illegal activities that are actively hidden (cf. the
phenomenon of audit fraud by the audited company;
Lund-Thomsen, 2008). For instance, slave-holders skimming
huge profits from their activities will not be susceptible to
change in response to premium-price incentives for social
standards from the buying company. They might instead take
the premium and at the same time extend their existing
profitable business model.
Due to the strong incentives of slave-holders to actively hide
the nature of their business, existing indicators of financial and
operational (Gunasekaran et al., 2004) as well as sustainable
supply chain performance (Bai and Sarkis, 2014; Varsei et al.,
2014) are not easily adaptable for the detection of slavery in
fragmented multi-tier supply chains. The widely used
reporting guidelines by the global reporting initiative (GRI)
address briefly the aspect of “forced or compulsory labour” as:

new indicators for slave labour in SCM practice and tools for
making supply chains slavery-free. These indicators are currently
absent or inadequate. A good starting point, however, is
sustainable SCM practices, which comprise a comprehensive
conceptualisation of supply chain actors that extends to
multi-stakeholder networks by the inclusion of, for example,
NGOs, governmental and international organisations (Pagell
and Wu, 2009). Furthermore, focal firms may increase suppliers’
social and environmental performance through supplier
development (Hall and Matos, 2010; Gimenez and Tachizawa,
2012) and “decommoditisation” (Pagell et al., 2010) of suppliers
by granting privileged conditions and long-term relationships
(Andersen and Skjoett-Larsen, 2009). Making the supply chain
more transparent and traceable is crucial for many supply chains,
such as food or textile, but difficult to achieve (Wieland and
Handfield, 2013). So focal firms engage in supplier monitoring
driven by the objective of minimising risks from materials,
products and operations (Seuring and Müller, 2008). The
exchange of information may eventually lead to collaboration
and increased supply chain performance in the economic, social
and environmental dimensions of sustainability. Third-party
standards and certification schemes may facilitate transparency
of business activities and traceability of materials and products
down the supply chain and have been widely used for ensuring
sustainability (Müller et al., 2009). Finally, supplier sustainability
assessment and reward systems may financially incentivise
suppliers complying with minimum standards or suppliers
continuously increasing their sustainability performance (Stiller
and Gold, 2014).
Features of these practices may be categorised in the
compliance-based paradigm of sustainable SCM which
focusses on monitoring and controlling by focal companies,
and the collaboration-based paradigm which aims to establish
multi-stakeholder networks of actors who are controlling each
other and leveraging complementary capabilities for the
overall benefit of the supply chain. While the shortcomings of
both paradigms have been exposed in detail by LundThomsen and Lindgreen (2014), we stress in this paper that
focal companies’ severe problems with tackling slave labour
derive partly from the incongruence of the accountability they
are ascribed by society and the responsibility they are
assuming themselves with their actual reach of power. This
power diminishes rapidly beyond their direct suppliers
(Grimm et al., 2014; Tachizawa and Wong, 2014). However,

[. . .] operations and suppliers identified as having significant risk for
incidents of forced or compulsory labor, and measures to contribute to the
elimination of all forms of “forced or compulsory labor” (GRI, 2013, p. 73).

It is noticeable that GRI (2013) avoids the terms “slave” and
“slavery” throughout its whole report and prefers to use
“forced and compulsory labor”. Furthermore, it does not give
guidance on the crucial question of how to assess the risk for
incidents of slavery.
The first step to developing suitable indicators is the
enhancement of supply chain visibility and transparency by
supply chain mapping, even though it is not clear how to
detect slave labour activities in parts of the supply chain that
deliberately do not want to be detected. As a thumb rule, the
following conditions may serve as rough initial indicators for
the existence of slave labour (CIPS-Walk Free, 2013). It is
advisable that supply chain managers, auditing teams and
certification bodies take an especially careful approach if one
or more of these conditions apply:
●
low worker protection due to inadequate laws,
enforcement and government accountability;
●
high percentage of working poor;
●
lack of other employment opportunities and domination
of labour market by one or a few employers;
●
agent-based recruitment of labourers;
●
social acceptance of worker exploitation;
488

●

●

●

Downloaded by University of Nottingham At 06:12 31 October 2018 (PT)

●

Modern slavery challenges

Supply Chain Management: An International Journal

Stefan Gold, Alexander Trautrims and Zoe Trodd

Volume 20 · Number 5 · 2015 · 485–494

2012b). Data triangulation through interviews, discussions
and focus groups was necessary as unfree workers did not
always perceive themselves to be in forced labour. The ILO
catalogue’s indicators are categorised as: unfree recruitment,
work and life under duress and impossibility of leaving the
employer. In each category are strong and medium indicators
for involuntariness and menace of penalty. One example of a
strong indicator for menace of penalty in the category “unfree
recruitment of adults” is the withholding of assets or cash; an
example of a medium indicator is the exclusion from future
employment (Verité, 2011a).
Effective tools and indicator systems for detecting slavery in
a supply chain must therefore make use of a combination of
monitoring of risk indicators, triangulation of various data
sources and inspections (Table II). However, the availability
of data, inspection capacity and access to local knowledge will
vary between regions and empirical case work is required to
provide solid information on how to allocate tools and
indicators to various context-specific supply scenarios.

widespread discrimination against certain groups of
workers;
high percentage of migrants or minorities in the
workforce;
location of production activities in conflict zones; and
high proportion of low skilled labour in industries such
as raw material extracting and/or processing.

While such indicators may serve as a general early warning
system for the risk of slavery occurrence, it is clear that, in
practice, different lenses are required to actually detect slave
labour in supply chains. This search may, for example, involve
the analysis of economic data on various levels (village, region,
etc.) or the assessment of photos taken by satellites and planes.
The absence of economic activity in a region that would
otherwise be generated by the workforce spending their wages
or an unsustainable way of living in rural settlements are
warning signs for slave labour conditions. The verification of
such indicators clearly requires an approach that goes beyond
the traditional tick-box approach of supply chain auditing
(Lund-Thomsen, 2008; Wieland and Handfield, 2013).
Useful methods to identify slave labour will vary depending
on the context of the investigation. For example, slavery was
found in numerous cases on sugar cane plantations that
produce ethanol fuel in Brazil (Rush, 2007). In the Brazilian
ethanol industry, occurrences of slavery were overrepresented
in geographical areas where only few producers could be
found, as these plantations dominated the local market for
agricultural work. Slave labour was also found mainly in
geographical areas of recent expansion and was more common
when labourers were employed indirectly through agents and
not by the ethanol producers directly (McGrath, 2013). The
proliferating occurrence of such industry characteristics and
employment structures must be taken as indicators for a
higher risk of slavery occurrence and increase suspicion,
although each on their own cannot be considered sufficient
evidence. Understanding the characteristics of such cases
provides indicators for the investigation of suppliers.
The existence of a functioning state administration was
fundamental in this approach. In the Brazilian ethanol
industry, state labour inspectors identified slave labour
through observation and independently conducted interviews.
Evidence for slave labour came from the presence of
numerous indicators such as degrading working conditions,
the absence of health and safety considerations and
non-transparent pay systems; it could also be seen through
indirect measures such as the workforce demographics (where
White workers were strongly underrepresented) (McGrath,
2013). The approach in this case relied on a functioning state
labour inspection capacity. Where this is not in place,
multi-national companies are essentially asked to step into the
gap by policing their supply chains (Vermeulen and Kok,
2012). Large businesses with more specialised functions and
more resources may find it easier to develop capacity for such
activities, but this may be more difficult for small- and
medium-sized enterprises operating in fragmented industries.
Another example for the identification of forced labour was
found in Indonesian anchovy fishing. Here, slavery was
identified through a survey and qualitative interviews.
Independent researchers surveyed and interviewed workers
using the ILO catalogue for slave labour indicators (ILO,

Potential company responses to the detection of slave
labour in the supply chain
If slavery is detected in a supply chain, the most
straightforward response by companies is to radically
withdraw their sourcing activities from the entire region or
country. Toor (2001, p. 201) draws a similar conclusion when
investigating multi-national companies’ responses to the
detection of child labour at a supplier level: “In this age of
fly-by-night capital, it is usually easier for multi-national
corporations to pack up and leave undesirable areas for
greener pastures”. Even if slave labour tends to pull down the
local and regional wage level and slaves do not fuel local
consumption because they lack purchasing power (Datta and
Bales, 2013), a general withdrawal would substantially worsen
the socio-economic situation in the region. Furthermore, a
withdrawal would not necessarily solve the specific problem of
slave labour in the community and/or at an individual level
because competitors (for example those serving markets with
less public and consumer awareness of human right issues)
may easily take over the supply produced by slave labour. This
consideration underlines the responsibility of focal companies
towards the regions from which they source. It calls for
company responses that go beyond risk minimisation
(regarding litigation and corporate reputation) and aim for
eradicating slave labour in the regions where it has been
detected – together with the socio-economic conditions that
facilitate it.
When a British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC)
documentary exposed the degree of slave and child labour on
West African cocoa farms in 2000, both politics and business
strived for adequate responses. In 2001, a voluntary
agreement known as Harkin-Engel Protocol was signed that
aimed at ending the worst forms of child labour in cocoa
production. This agreement brought together governments,
cocoa industry and producers, cocoa labourers and civil
society organisations. It was confirmed and reinforced by the
Joint Declaration and accompanying Framework of Action to
Support the Implementation of the Harkin-Engel Protocol in
2010 (Responsible Cocoa, 2010). The Harkin-Engel Protocol
stipulated the formation of the International Cocoa Initiative
489

Modern slavery challenges

Supply Chain Management: An International Journal

Stefan Gold, Alexander Trautrims and Zoe Trodd

Volume 20 · Number 5 · 2015 · 485–494

Downloaded by University of Nottingham At 06:12 31 October 2018 (PT)

Table II Characteristics of tools and indicator systems for detecting slavery in supply chains
Main characteristics

Description

Risk monitoring
Triangulation of indicators and
data sources
Targeted investigation

Indicators are continuously monitored across geographical areas thus setting up a risk-radar for slavery
Indicators and data sources are triangulated to substantiate suspicion of slavery in specific geographical
areas and industry sectors
Targeted investigations are carried out by focal companies, independent auditing bodies or governmental
agencies if the use of slave labour is reasonably suspected

many stakeholders as possible to buy into the reduction of
slavery to gain legitimacy and effectiveness (Schouten and
Glasbergen, 2011). CCAs aim to change the local institutional
setting so as to immunise regions against slavery (Muthuri
et al., 2012). Besides strategies for enhancing livelihood, this
can, for example, involve education and the establishment of
labour rights and civil rights groups to stimulate long-term
cultural and economic changes. The third approach, as with
the example of PMI, focusses on working with the supply base
and on developing suppliers (Hall and Matos, 2010; Gimenez
and Tachizawa, 2012), enabling them to perform productively
in their business without the use of slave labour. Supplier
development usually involves technology and knowledge
transfer to suppliers, high levels of collaboration and
awareness-raising regarding product quality including the
protection of human and labour rights during the production
process.
All three approaches may contribute towards mitigating the
use of slave labour, but they address the problem through
different routes and use different levers (Table III). While
being highly dependent on the local circumstances and the
industry of the supply chain where slavery was found, in
practice, all three approaches are often found to work
together.

(ICI) founded in 2002 as a clearing house on best practice
(Responsible Cocoa, 2010) and a driver for tackling child and
slave labour through a community-centred approach (CCA)
in Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire, working in the fields of
education, health, water and sanitation, child protection and
livelihood diversification. The ICI is funded by individual
chocolate and cocoa companies and is led by a joint industry
– civil society board, with the ILO in an advisory function. ICI
leverages knowledge and resources in various sustainable
cocoa programmes run by its member companies such as
Barry Callebaut’s Quality Partner Programme, Cargill’s
Cocoa Promise Programme and Mondelez International’s
Cocoa Life Programme. It collaborates closely with the
governments of cocoa-producing developing countries (ICI,
2014). While there is still a long way to go before slavery is
eliminated from chocolate industry, the CCA based on
technological and social innovations, dissemination of good
practice and partnerships with a variety of actors has improved
the current situation in Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire. Determination
and substantial funding from governments and/or business, an
industry structure dominated by big players, and the geographic
concentration of efforts are important factors in the cocoa
industry’s progress so far.
These factors also played a role in 2010 when Human
Rights Watch (HRW, 2010) accused Philip Morris
International (PMI) of sourcing from farms that used child
and forced labour in Kazakhstan (Kramer, 2010). PMI
responded to the allegations by commissioning Verité – a
global non-profit social auditing organisation – to assess the
supplying farms’ adherence to PMI’s Good Agricultural
Practices standards in Kazakhstan, including inter alia child
and forced labour as well as the treatment of migrant workers
(Verité, 2011b)[4]. Furthermore, PMI undertook various
programmes to address child and forced labour, including
regular and unannounced inspections as well as training for
farmers and parents, and redrafted its global Agricultural
Labour Policy to mandate tightened labour condition
standards for suppliers (Amon et al., 2012). While the
situation improved considerably among farmers supplying
PMI (Phipps, 2014), the picture looks less promising at an
overall country level. The United Nations Special Rapporteur on
contemporary forms of slavery acknowledges significant progress
in the fight against child and slave labour on tobacco farms in
Kazakhstan, but it urges the government and companies to
undertake further necessary steps towards establishing effective
enforcement and monitoring mechanisms (UNOG, 2014).
Such approaches to the reduction of slavery in the supply
chain can be categorised by their main lever of action. MSIs –
such as the ICI – address numerous stakeholders: buyers and
suppliers of the product, government and local enforcement
authorities, labour unions and others. Its key idea is to get as

Avenues for future research
Addressing the managerial problem of slave labour in
(international) supply chains implies fully understanding the
problem of slavery: its appearances, its financial and
socio-cultural rationale and its stakes. While SCM research
may build on insights and knowledge about slavery from a
variety of disciplines (as outlined in “Defining slavery”
section), the economic and management perspective offers
particularly promising avenues for future SCM research on
slavery. On a macro-economic level, slave labour in supply
chains may be economically classified as an additional aspect
of social external costs that need to be internalised for ensuring
fair competition and functioning markets (Pérez-Martínez and
Vassallo-Magro, 2013). On a micro-economic level, slavery
may be seen as the attempt of slave-holders to illegitimately
under-price labour by taking advantage of specific conditions
related to industry and the broader institutional setting, i.e.
the socio-economic, cultural, regulatory and geographic
context (Crane, 2013).
Figure 1 proposes a preliminary conceptualisation of the
challenges that slavery poses to SCM. It focusses on
developing tools and indicator systems for detecting slavery in
supply chains (Table II) and effective company responses after
the detection of slavery (Table III), which rely on appropriate
capabilities to be developed at a firm level, supply chain level
and business – non-business partnership level (Hahn and
490

Modern slavery challenges

Supply Chain Management: An International Journal

Stefan Gold, Alexander Trautrims and Zoe Trodd

Volume 20 · Number 5 · 2015 · 485–494

Table III Remediating responses to detection of slavery in the supply chain
Approach

Main features

Role of focal companies

MSI

Brings together a variety of stakeholders including governments,
workers, industry, and civil society and international
organisations; facilitates sector-encompassing solutions,
increases legitimacy, and leverages synergies
CCA
Focuses on families and whole communities instead of
individuals thus addressing the systemic causes of slave labour;
may address education, health, child and livelihood protection
Supplier development and Trains suppliers and builds capacity among workers, raises
capacity-building
awareness of the problem, decreases vulnerability to slave
labour and other exploitative practices

Figure 1 Conceptualising the challenges of slavery to supply chain
management

Downloaded by University of Nottingham At 06:12 31 October 2018 (PT)

Industry
Supply chain
Product/commodity

•
•
•

•
•
•

•
•
•

Socio-economic condions
Culture
Tradions

Government regulaon
Geographical situaon
Languages

Capabilies
Firm-level
Supply chain level
Business-non-business partnership level

Remediaon

Detecon
•

Risk monitoring

•

Triangulaon of
indicators and data
sources

•

Targeted
invesgaon

•

Mul-stakeholder
iniave

•

Community-centred
approach

•

Supplier
development and
capacity-building

Promoting technological and social innovations in
partnership with other stakeholders; developing
culturally sensitised learning attitude; funding
Supplier development programmes; knowledge-transfer;
capacity-building in partnership with NGOs and/or
governments; funding

their resources and capabilities as well as how effectively these
resources and capabilities serve the purpose of detecting and
remediating slavery in supply chains. For example, according
to our case illustrations in “Management tools and indicator
systems for mitigating slavery in supply chains” and “Potential
company responses to the detection of slave labour in the
supply chain” sections, an oligopolistic industry structure
appears to be beneficial for effectively tackling slave labour
issues in an industry sector. Research on responses from
industries with predominantly small- and medium-sized
enterprises characterised by fewer available resources and low
buying power of single companies is therefore particularly
important for the advancement of supply chain practice.
Collaborative approaches that involve a multitude of
companies (for example, on joint auditing or community
development) are hampered by the opportunistic behaviour of
single firms as conceptualised by the free rider problem and
game theory. As another example, supply chain managers
need to adapt their actions to the characteristics of the supply
chain. A long geographical distance between the point of
material extraction or pre-fabrication and the point of use or
consumption generally makes it harder for businesses to
identify slavery in their supply chains and requires local
capacity, for example, the involvement of local NGOs and
governmental bodies (Hahn and Gold, 2014). High degrees of
fragmentation and disintegration in supply chains make
distant parts of the supply chain less visible and therefore
make it easy to hide slavery (Bitran et al., 2007). In contrast to
some other sustainability aspects, slavery is not measurable ex
post because commodity-type products made from slave
labour cannot be identified once they reach the supply chain’s
next tier. This consideration also changes possible remediating
action on the market side by focal companies as a product
recall may not only be harder to justify than for potentially
consumer-harming products but also be impossible to
effectively execute.
These types of questions may be framed by contingency
theory (Sousa and Voss, 2008) and institutional theory
(Sarkis et al., 2011). Concerning the former, knowledge
from other disciplines as outlined in Table I may help to
achieve a deeper understanding of contingency factors
such as culture, geography, legislation and regulation. The
latter may investigate why and how slave-holders can
continuously resist mimetic, normative and coercive
isomorphic pressures towards more legitimate forms of
business (DiMaggio and Powell, 1983). Thus, supply chain

Instuonal context
•
•
•

Developing various degrees of leadership; disseminating
and imitating best-practice; funding

Gold, 2014). Detection and remediation efforts facilitated by
appropriate capabilities are again embedded in a broader
institutional context.
The effectiveness of the various approaches for detecting
slavery and responding to the detection of slavery in supply
chains (as outlined in Tables II and III) requires further
empirical investigation. Conceptual or inductive empirical
research may also contribute to the list of potential
approaches. In terms of remediation, it may specifically be
asked how to cut off slave-holders’ vital resources such as the
in-flow of new labour, geographical isolation or social
acceptance.
Figure 1 also draws the attention of SCM researchers
towards the question of which resources and capabilities need
to be developed within individual companies, through
collaboration along the supply chain and with further
non-economic actors – such as NGOs and governmental
bodies (Hahn and Gold, 2014) – for implementing the various
approaches for slavery detection and remediation. These types
of questions suggest the theoretical lenses of the
resource-based or relational view, resource-dependency
theory or dynamic capabilities approach, which have all been
used in sustainable SCM research so far (the review by Sarkis
et al., 2011 on green SCM).
Increasing again the level of complexity, various
contingency factors referring to the broader institutional
context influence how companies can build, access and exploit
491

Modern slavery challenges

Supply Chain Management: An International Journal

Stefan Gold, Alexander Trautrims and Zoe Trodd

Volume 20 · Number 5 · 2015 · 485–494

managers may see more clearly which actions to take (also
in collaboration with other non-economic actors) to weaken
this resistance, with the ultimate aim of making their supply
chains slavery free.

Chain Management: An International Journal, Vol. 19 No. 3,
pp. 275-291.
Bales, K. (2016), Blood and Earth: Modern Slavery, Ecocide,
and the Secret to Saving the World, Random House, New
York, NY.
Bales, K. and Trodd, Z. (2013), “Addressing contemporary
forms of slavery in EU external policy: briefing paper for the
European Parliament’s subcommittee on human rights”,
available at: http://bookshop.europa.eu/de/addressingcontemporary-forms-of-slavery-in-eu-external-policy-pbBB
0113823/ (accessed 30 January 2015).
Bales, K., Trodd, Z. and Williamson, A.K. (2009), Modern
Slavery: The Secret World of 27 Million People, Oneworld,
Oxford.
Barrientos, S., Kothari, U. and Phillips, N. (2013),
“Dynamics of unfree labour in the contemporary global
economy”, Journal of Development Studies, Vol. 49 No. 8,
pp. 1037-1041.
Bellagio-Harvard Guidelines (2012), “Bellagio-Harvard guidelines
on the legal parameters of slavery”, available at: www.qub.ac.
uk/schools/SchoolofLaw/Research/HumanRightsCentre/
Resources/Bellagio-HarvardGuidelinesontheLegal
ParametersofSlavery/ (accessed 3 December 2014), Also
published in Allain, J. (2012), The Legal Understanding of
Slavery: From the Historical to the Contemporary, Oxford
University Press, pp. 375-380.
Bitran, G.R., Gurumurthi, S. and Sam, S.L. (2007), “The
need for third-party coordination in supply chain
governance”, MIT Sloan Management Review, Vol. 48
No. 3, pp. 30-37, 92.
Bosco, M. and Munck, P. (2013), Conflict Minerals
Compliance – Hassle or Opportunity, CSCMP Hot Topics.
Breman, J. (2007), Labor Bondage in West India: From Past to
Present, Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
CIPS-Walk Free (Chartered Institute of Purchasing and
Supply-Walk Free Foundation) (2013), “Modern slavery in
supply chains”, available at: www.cips.org/Documents/A
bout%20CIPS/Ethics/CIPS_ModernSlavery_Broch_WEB.
pdf (accessed 3 December 2014).
Crane, A. (2013), “Modern slavery as a management practice:
exploring the conditions and capabilities for human
exploitation”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 38
No. 1, pp. 49-69.
Datta, M.N. and Bales, K. (2013), “Slavery is bad for
business: analyzing the impact of slavery on national
economies”, Brown Journal of World Affairs, Vol. 19 No. 2,
pp. 205-223.
David, F., Viederman, D., Plant, R., McQuade, A.,
Batstone, D., Bales, K. and Costello, T. (2012), “Starting a
dialogue: harnessing the power of business to eliminate
modern slavery”, available at: www.walkfreefoundation.org/
wp-content/uploads/2014/02/harnessing_the_power_of_
business_to_eliminate_modern_slavery.pdf (accessed 3
December 2014).
DiMaggio, P.J. and Powell, W.W. (1983), “The iron cage
revisited: institutional isomorphism and collective
rationality in organizational fields”, American Sociological
Review, Vol. 48 No. 2, pp. 147-160.
Gimenez, C. and Tachizawa, E.M. (2012), “Extending
sustainability to suppliers: a systematic literature review”,

Downloaded by University of Nottingham At 06:12 31 October 2018 (PT)

Notes
1 The 2014 figure represented an update to the 2013 GSI
count of approximately 30 million slaves, a figure also
quoted in an EU Parliament briefing paper (Bales and
Trodd, 2013). Today’s slavery is notoriously difficult to
quantify because it is a hidden crime. The GSI is the first
attempt to measure slavery in today’s world, country by
country, and its researchers make all quantitative data
freely available for re-analysis, also acknowledging that
they continue to refine the methodologies for the annual
index. The researchers use nationally representative,
random sample surveys, alongside data from other
pre-existing surveys and a review of secondary sources,
plus an extrapolation method. A detailed methodology
paper for the GSI is available at www.globalslaveryindex.
org/methodology
2 For another example of US Government attempts to address
slavery in supply chains, see the US Department of Labor’s
(2014a, 2014b) list of goods and products made with child
and forced labour. See also the UN’s Guiding Principles on
Business and Human Rights (United Nations, 2011).
Although it requires legislation at state or EU level to
determine what businesses must do, the UN explains in its
guidelines what businesses should do.
3 See also the failed attempt in 2012 to pass the Transparency
in UK Company Supply Chains (Eradication of Slavery)
Bill, available at: www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/bills/
cbill/2012-2013/0026/13026.pdf (accessed 31 January
2015).
4 For more work in the non-profit sector on awareness-raising
and intervention around supply chains, see http://
madeinafreeworld.com/business and http://slaveryfootprint.org/

References
Allain, J. (2009), “The definition of slavery in international
law”, Howard Law Journal, Vol. 52 No. 2, pp. 239-275.
Amon, J.J., Buchanan, J., Cohen, J. and Kippenberg, J. (2012),
“Child labor and environmental health: government
obligations and human rights”, International Journal of
Pediatrics, Vol. 2012, pp. 1-8, available at: www.hindawi.com/
journals/ijpedi/2012/938306/
Andersen, M. and Skjoett-Larsen, T. (2009), “Corporate
social responsibility in global supply chains”, Supply Chain
Management: An International Journal, Vol. 14 No. 2,
pp. 75-86.
Bafilemba, F., Mueller, T. and Lezhnev, S. (2014), “The
impact of Dodd-Frank and conflict minerals reforms on
Eastern Congo’s conflict”, The Enough Project, available
at: www.enoughproject.org/files/Enough%20Project%20%20The%20Impact%20of%20Dodd-Frank%20and%20C
onflict%20Minerals%20Reforms%20on%20Eastern%20C
ongo%E2%80%99s%20Conflict%2010June2014.pdf
Bai, C. and Sarkis, J. (2014), “Determining and applying
sustainable supplier key performance indicators”, Supply
492

Downloaded by University of Nottingham At 06:12 31 October 2018 (PT)

Modern slavery challenges

Supply Chain Management: An International Journal

Stefan Gold, Alexander Trautrims and Zoe Trodd

Volume 20 · Number 5 · 2015 · 485–494

Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, Vol. 17
No. 5, pp. 531-543.
GRI (Global Reporting Initiative) (2013), “G4 sustainability
reporting guidelines: reporting principles and standard
disclosures”, available at: www.globalreporting.org/
resourcelibrary/GRIG4-Part1-Reporting-Principles-andStandard-Disclosures.pdf (accessed 9 September 2014).
Grimm, J.H., Hofstetter, J.S. and Sarkis, J. (2014), “Critical
factors for sub-supplier management: a sustainable food
supply chains perspective”, International Journal of
Production Economics, Vol. 152, pp. 159-173.
Gunasekaran, A., Patel, C. and McGaughey, R.E. (2004), “A
framework for supply chain performance measurement”,
International Journal of Production Economics, Vol. 87 No. 8,
pp. 333-347.
Hahn, R. and Gold, S. (2014), “Resources and governance in
‘base of the pyramid’-partnerships: assessing collaborations
between businesses and non-business actors”, Journal of
Business Research, Vol. 67 No. 7, pp. 1321-1333.
Hall, J. and Matos, S. (2010), “Incorporating impoverished
communities in sustainable supply chains”, International
Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management,
Vol. 40 Nos 1/2, pp. 124-147.
Hodal, K., Kelly, C. and Lawrence, F. (2014), “Revealed:
Asian slave labour producing prawns for supermarkets in
US, UK”, The Guardian, 10 June.
HRW (Human Rights Watch) (2010), “Hellish work’ –
exploitation of migrant tobacco workers in Kazakhstan”,
available at: www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/kazakhstan
0710webwcover_1.pdf (accessed 8 January 2015).
ICI (International Cocoa Initiative) (2014), “The international
cocoa initiative – annual report 2013”, available at: www.
cocoainitiative.org/en/documents-manager/english/56-annualreport-2013/file (accessed 8 January 2015).
ILO (International Labour Organisation) (2012a), “Global
estimate of forced labour”, available at: www.ilo.org/
washington/areas/elimination-of-forced-labor/WCMS_182
004/lang– en/index.htm (accessed 28 January 2015).
ILO (International Labour Organisation) (2012b), “Hard to see,
harder to count – survey guidelines to estimate forced labour of
adults and children”, available at: www.ilo.org/beirut/
publications/WCMS_182096/lang– en/index.htm (accessed 9
January 2015).
Kramer, A.E. (2010), “Philip Morris is said to benefit from
child labor”, The New York Times, 14 July, p. B2.
LeBaron, G. (2015), “Unfree labour beyond binaries: insecurity,
social hierarchy and labour market restructuring”, International
Feminist Journal of Politics, Vol. 17 No. 1.
Lund-Thomsen, P. (2008), “The global sourcing and codes of
conduct debate: five myths and five recommendations”,
Development and Change, Vol. 39 No. 6, pp. 1005-1018.
Lund-Thomsen, P. and Lindgreen, A. (2014), “Corporate
social responsibility in global value chains: where are we
now and where are we going?”, Journal of Business Ethics,
Vol. 123 No. 1, pp. 11-22.
McGrath, S. (2013), “Fuelling global production networks
with slave labour?: migrant sugar cane workers in the
Brazilian ethanol GPN”, Geoforum, Vol. 44, pp. 32-43.
Magnan, G.M., Fawcett, S.E., Alcantar, T.N. and
Henshaw, K. (2011), “On supply chains and reputation

risk: tracking changes in supplier codes of conduct”,
International Journal of Procurement Management, Vol. 4
No. 6, pp. 567-588.
Modern Slavery Bill (2015), “HL Bill 69”, available at: www.
publications.parliament.uk/pa/bills/lbill/2014-2015/0069/
15069.pdf (accessed 31 January 2015).
Müller, M., Gomes dos Santos, V. and Seuring, S. (2009),
“The contribution of environmental and social standards
towards ensuring legitimacy in supply chain governance”,
Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 89 No. 4, pp. 509-523.
Muthuri, J.N., Moon, J. and Idemudia, U. (2012),
“Corporate innovation and sustainable community
development in developing countries”, Business and Society,
Vol. 51 No. 3, pp. 355-381.
National Pact for the Eradication of Slave Labour (2005),
available at: www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/– dgreports/–
ilo-washington/documents/genericdocument/wcms_189835.
pdf (accessed 30 January 2015).
Pagell, M. and Wu, Z. (2009), “Building a more complete
theory of sustainable supply chain management using case
studies of 10 exemplars”, Journal of Supply Chain
Management, Vol. 45 No. 2, pp. 37-56.
Pagell, M., Wu, Z. and Wasserman, M.E. (2010), “Thinking
differently about purchasing portfolios: an assessment of
sustainable sourcing”, Journal of Supply Chain Management,
Vol. 46 No. 1, pp. 57-73.
Pérez-Martínez, P.J. and Vassallo-Magro, J.M. (2013),
“Changes in the external costs of freight surface transport in
Spain”, Research in Transportation Economics, Vol. 42 No. 1,
pp. 61-76.
Phipps, S. (2014), “Supply chain briefing part 3: systemic
change”, Ethical Corporation, 10 September.
Pollitt, M. (2014), “Freeing the slaves from our supply
chains”, Human Resource Management International Digest,
Vol. 22 No. 7, pp. 1-4.
Responsible Cocoa (2010), “The Harkin-Engel protocol”,
available at: http://responsiblecocoa.com/about-us/theharkin-engel-protocol/ (accessed 8 January 2015).
Rush, V. (2007), “Ethanol slavery found on Brazil
plantation”, EIR, available at: www.larouchepub.com/eiw/
public/2007/eirv34n28-20070720/32_728.pdf (accessed 13
January 2015).
Sarkis, J., Zhu, Q. and Lai, K.-H. (2011), “An organizational
theoretic review of green supply chain management
literature”, International Journal of Production Economics,
Vol. 130 No. 1, pp. 1-15.
Schouten, G. and Glasbergen, P. (2011), “Creating
legitimacy in global private governance: the case of the
roundtable on sustainable palm oil”, Ecological Economics,
Vol. 70 No. 11, pp. 1891-1899.
Seuring, S. and Müller, M. (2008), “From a literature review
to a conceptual framework for sustainable supply chain
management”, Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 16 No. 15,
pp. 1699-1710.
Sousa, R. and Voss, C.A. (2008), “Contingency research in
operations management practices”, Journal of Operations
Management, Vol. 26 No. 6, pp. 697-713.
Stiller, S. and Gold, S. (2014), “Socially sustainable supply
chain management practices in the Indian seed sector – a
493

Downloaded by University of Nottingham At 06:12 31 October 2018 (PT)

Modern slavery challenges

Supply Chain Management: An International Journal

Stefan Gold, Alexander Trautrims and Zoe Trodd

Volume 20 · Number 5 · 2015 · 485–494

case study”, Supply Chain Forum: An International Journal,
Vol. 5 No. 1, pp. 52-67.
Tachizawa, E.M. and Wong, C.Y. (2014), “Towards a theory
of multi-tier sustainable supply chains: a systematic
literature review”, Supply Chain Management: An
International Journal, Vol. 19 Nos 5/6, pp. 643-663.
Toor, S. (2001), “Child labor in Pakistan: coming of age in
the new world order”, Annals of the American Academy of
Political and Social Science, Vol. 575, pp. 194-224.
United Nations (2011), “Guiding principles on business and
human rights”, available at: www.ohchr.org/Documents/
Publications/GuidingPrinciplesBusinessHR_EN.pdf (accessed
30 January 2015).
UNOG (United Nations Office in Geneva) (2014),
Kazakhstan Urged to Step up Fight Against Slavery, UNOG,
Geneva.
US Department of Labor (2014a), “List of goods produced by
child labor or forced labor”, available at: www.dol.gov/ilab/
reports/child-labor/list-of-goods (accessed 30 January
2015).
US Department of Labor (2014b), “List of products produced
by forced or indentured child labor”, available at: www.dol.
gov/ilab/reports/child-labor/list-of-products (accessed 30
January 2015).
Varsei, M., Soosay, C., Fahimnia, B. and Sarkis, J. (2014),
“Framing sustainability performance of supply chains with
multidimensional indicators”, Supply Chain Management:
An International Journal, Vol. 19 No. 3, pp. 242-257.
Verité (2011a), “Research on indicators of forced labor in the
Supply Chain of Fish in Indonesia: platform (Jermal)
fishing, small-boat anchovy fishing, and blast fishing”,
available at: www.verite.org/sites/default/files/images/
Research%20on%20Indicators%20of%20Forced%20
Labor%20in%20the%20Indonesian%20Fishing%20
Sector__9.16.pdf (accessed 9 January 2015).
Verité (2011b), “Farm level assessment of adherence to PMI
GAP standards in Kazakhstan”, available at: www.verite.
org/sites/default/files/images/Verite_Report_for_PMI_on_
Kazakhstan-2_May_2011.pdf (accessed 8 January 2015).
Vermeulen, W.J.V. and Kok, M.T.J. (2012), “Government
interventions in sustainable supply chain governance:

experience in Dutch front-running cases”, Ecological
Economics, Vol. 83, pp. 183-196.
Walk Free Foundation (2014), Global Slavery Index 2014,
Walk Free Foundation.
Wieland, A. and Handfield, R. (2013), “The socially
responsible supply chain: an imperative for global
corporations”, Supply Chain Management Review, Vol. 17
No. 5, pp. 22-29.
Wolf, J. (2014), “The relationship between sustainable supply
chain management, stakeholder pressure and corporate
sustainability performance”, Journal of Business Ethics,
Vol. 119 No. 3, pp. 317-328.

Further reading
UNODC (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime)
(2012), Global Report on Trafficking in Persons, UNODC,
Vienna.

About the authors
Stefan Gold is a Assistant Professor at the International
Centre for Corporate Social Responsibility of Nottingham
University Business School, UK. He received his doctoral
degree from the Faculty of Business and Economics of the
University of Kassel, Germany in 2011. His research interests
comprise supply chain and operations management, strategic
management and sustainability. Stefan Gold is the
corresponding author and can be contacted at: stefan.gold@
nottingham.ac.uk
Alexander Trautrims is a Lecturer in Supply Chain and
Operations Management at Nottingham University Business
School, UK. His research is interested in managerial
decision-making in supply chains and his current work
focusses on sourcing and supply management.
Zoe Trodd is a Professor in the Department of American and
Canadian Studies at the University of Nottingham. She has a
PhD from Harvard University and has published two books
and several articles about contemporary slavery.

For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com

494

Downloaded by University of Nottingham At 06:12 31 October 2018 (PT)

This article has been cited by:
1. BensteadAmy V., Amy V. Benstead, HendryLinda C., Linda C. Hendry, StevensonMark, Mark Stevenson. 2018. Horizontal
collaboration in response to modern slavery legislation. International Journal of Operations & Production Management 38:12,
2286-2312. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]
2. Rodrigo Martins Baptista, Mariana Lima Bandeira, Maria Tereza Saraiva de Souza. 2018. The invisibility of the black population
in modern slavery: evidence based on conditions of social vulnerability. Organizações & Sociedade 25:87, 676-703. [Crossref]
3. Bruno S. Silvestre, Marcelo S. Monteiro, Fernando Luiz E. Viana, José Milton de Sousa-Filho. 2018. Challenges for sustainable
supply chain management: When stakeholder collaboration becomes conducive to corruption. Journal of Cleaner Production 194,
766-776. [Crossref]
4. Darren McGuire, Knut Laaser. 2018. ‘You have to pick’: Cotton and state-organized forced labour in Uzbekistan. Economic and
Industrial Democracy 35, 0143831X1878978. [Crossref]
5. Katherine Leanne Christ, Roger Leonard Burritt. 2018. Current perceptions on the problem of modern slavery in business.
Business Strategy & Development 1:2, 103-114. [Crossref]
6. Sadaat Ali Yawar, Stefan Seuring. 2018. The role of supplier development in managing social and societal issues in supply chains.
Journal of Cleaner Production 182, 227-237. [Crossref]
7. Justine Nolan, Gregory Bott. 2018. Global supply chains and human rights: spotlight on forced labour and modern slavery
practices. Australian Journal of Human Rights 48, 1-26. [Crossref]
8. StevensonMark, Mark Stevenson, ColeRosanna, Rosanna Cole. 2018. Modern slavery in supply chains: a secondary data analysis
of detection, remediation and disclosure. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal 23:2, 81-99. [Abstract] [Full Text]
[PDF]
9. Erica Russell, Jacquetta Lee, Roland Clift. 2018. Can the SDGs Provide a Basis for Supply Chain Decisions in the Construction
Sector?. Sustainability 10:3, 629. [Crossref]
10. Hannes Hofmann, Martin C. Schleper, Constantin Blome. 2018. Conflict Minerals and Supply Chain Due Diligence: An
Exploratory Study of Multi-tier Supply Chains. Journal of Business Ethics 147:1, 115-141. [Crossref]
11. Anjali Awasthi, Kannan Govindan, Stefan Gold. 2018. Multi-tier sustainable global supplier selection using a fuzzy AHP-VIKOR
based approach. International Journal of Production Economics 195, 106-117. [Crossref]
12. Stefan Gold, Martin C. Schleper. 2017. A pathway towards true sustainability: A recognition foundation of sustainable supply
chain management. European Management Journal 35:4, 425-429. [Crossref]
13. John N. Kittinger, Lydia C. L. Teh, Edward H. Allison, Nathan J. Bennett, Larry B. Crowder, Elena M. Finkbeiner, Christina
Hicks, Cheryl G. Scarton, Katrina Nakamura, Yoshitaka Ota, Jhana Young, Aurora Alifano, Ashley Apel, Allison Arbib, Lori
Bishop, Mariah Boyle, Andrés M. Cisneros-Montemayor, Philip Hunter, Elodie Le Cornu, Max Levine, Richard S. Jones, J.
Zachary Koehn, Melissa Marschke, Julia G. Mason, Fiorenza Micheli, Loren McClenachan, Charlotte Opal, Jonathan Peacey, S.
Hoyt Peckham, Eva Schemmel, Vivienne Solis-Rivera, Wilf Swartz, T. 'Aulani Wilhelm. 2017. Committing to socially responsible
seafood:. Science 356:6341, 912-913. [Crossref]
14. Thomas Chesney, Stefan Gold, Alexander Trautrims. 2017. Agent based modelling as a decision support system for shadow
accounting. Decision Support Systems 95, 110-116. [Crossref]
15. Stephen John New. 2015. Modern slavery and the supply chain: the limits of corporate social responsibility?. Supply Chain
Management: An International Journal 20:6, 697-707. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]

