Production Planning & Control
The Management of Operations

ISSN: 0953-7287 (Print) 1366-5871 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/tppc20

Detecting and remediating modern slavery in
supply chains: a targeted audit approach
Amy V. Benstead, Linda C. Hendry & Mark Stevenson
To cite this article: Amy V. Benstead, Linda C. Hendry & Mark Stevenson (2021) Detecting and
remediating modern slavery in supply chains: a targeted audit approach, Production Planning
& Control, 32:13, 1136-1157, DOI: 10.1080/09537287.2020.1795290
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2020.1795290

© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group.
Published online: 24 Jul 2020.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 19828

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 58 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tppc20

PRODUCTION PLANNING & CONTROL
2021, VOL. 32, NO. 13, 1136–1157
https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2020.1795290

Detecting and remediating modern slavery in supply chains: a targeted
audit approach
Amy V. Bensteada

, Linda C. Hendryb

and Mark Stevensonb

a

Department of Materials, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK; bDepartment of Management Science, Lancaster University
Management School, Lancaster, UK
ABSTRACT

ARTICLE HISTORY

This paper investigates modern slavery detection and remediation. Action research has been conducted in the textiles and fashion industry, with the primary engagement involving a multi-billion
pound (GBP) turnover company and their modern slavery investigation at a high-risk supplier in South
East Asia. This paper responds to calls from the literature to investigate the modern slavery detection
process and provides empirical evidence involving collaboration with a large multinational NGO and
another of the audited supplier’s customers. Findings are presented from a first-hand account of the
detection process and suggest that a targeted audit is more likely to identify key indicators of modern
slavery. This type of audit includes investigating the end-to-end recruitment process by using a parallel
structure of management and worker interviews and documentation review. Evidence is also provided
of the company’s remediation process, which includes partnering with a local NGO to empower workers and collaboratively develop suppliers.

Received 12 March 2019
Accepted 8 July 2020

1. Introduction
Modern slavery, as occurring in the context of supply chains,
has been defined as: ‘the exploitation of a person who is
deprived of individual liberty anywhere along the supply chain
from raw material extraction to the final customer for service
provision or production” (Gold, Trautrims, and Trodd 2015,
487). The extent of this contemporary phenomenon is
emphasised by recent research conducted by the
International Labour Organisation (ILO) and the Walk Free
Foundation that estimated that, globally, 16 million people
are victims of economic forced labour exploitation, including
through modern day slavery in supply chains (ILO
(International Labour Organisation) 2017). In particular,
according to the recent ‘Global Slavery Index 2018’ published
in July 2018, the textiles and fashion industry is one of the
largest perpetrators of modern slavery globally (Walk Free
Foundation 2018). Modern slavery is thus a global issue with
instances in both developing and developed countries. For
example, there have been recent cases reported in the UK
news such as of ‘a slave workforce’ being discovered at
Kozee Sleep, a UK bed manufacturer supplying well-known
high street retailers (BBC 2016) and human trafficking discovered in a Sports Direct warehouse (The Guardian 2017;
BBC 2019).
Legislation has begun to be introduced around the world
in response to the modern slavery threat. Recent examples
include the ‘California Transparency in Supply Chains Act’
(State of California Department of Justice 2010) and the ‘UK
CONTACT Amy V. Benstead

amy.benstead@manchester.ac.uk

KEYWORDS

Modern slavery; supply
chain auditing; remediation;
transparency

Modern Slavery Act’ (UK Government 2015). The UK legislation contains the ‘Transparency in Supply Chains’ clause that
requires organisations with a turnover in excess of the currently stated threshold of £36 million to publish a statement
each financial year regarding action that is being taken to
combat modern slavery in their supply chains. The introduction of modern slavery legislation has provoked discussion of
this issue in the broader management literature (e.g. Crane
2013), and two recent key conceptual papers by New (2015)
and Gold, Trautrims, and Trodd (2015) along with empirical
research by Benstead, Hendry, and Stevenson (2018) have
contributed to a growing literature on sustainable supply
chain management (SSCM). It has been acknowledged that
slavery can enter the supply chain where labour intensity is
high and profit margins low (Crane 2013). A growing body
of research has also considered the heightened modern slavery risk when production and labour recruitment is outsourced (Allain et al. 2013; LeBaron and Lister 2015).
Amongst others, The Ethical Trade Initiative (ETI) has provided guidance for companies to improve their awareness of
deception and coercion during the sub-tier recruitment process. Practices identified that lead to forced labour is, for
example, withholding wages, recruitment fees, and passport
retention (ETI 2017). According to the ILO (International
Labour Organisation) (2019), ‘The retention of passports and
other identity documents is one of the most common forms of
coercion, restricting a migrant worker’s freedom of movement,
preventing them from seeking help and trapping them in
forced labour’.

Department of Materials, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK

ß 2020 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

PRODUCTION PLANNING & CONTROL

Amongst the organisational responses to this new legislation, as disclosed in modern slavery statements, is the use of
supplier audits to detect modern slavery (Stevenson and
Cole 2018). Whilst it is well documented that auditing is
commonly used to investigate social standards in a factory
(Jiang 2009; Lund-Thomsen and Lindgreen 2014; Helin and
Babri 2015), many authors have questioned the effectiveness
n et al. 2006; Tallontire et al. 2011;
of audits (Prieto-Carro

Guenin-Paracini, Malsch, and Paille 2014; Power and Gendron
2015). In particular, both New (2015) and Gold, Trautrims,
and Trodd (2015) highlighted that the illegal and hidden
nature of modern slavery makes detection difficult in fragmented multi-tier supply chains. These specific issues
deserve attention, yet research into modern slavery from a
supply chain perspective is limited, with authors calling for
more empirical work to identify effective means of detection
and remediation (e.g. Gold, Trautrims, and Trodd 2015).
Modern slavery is an important phenomenon to investigate
in order to advance the field of Operations and Supply Chain
Management as it relates to a number of important streams
of literature in the field. It can be seen as a particular branch
of the literature on socially Sustainable Supply Chain
Management (SSCM) and a threat that represents a specific
type of supply risk. Modern slavery legislation, such as that
introduced in the UK, questions the sourcing practices of
buyer firms and seeks to incentivise focal firms to improve
the transparency of their supply chains while remediation
speaks to the literature on supplier development practices.
Given that organisations claim to be using audits to address
socially SSCM related modern slavery risks (Stevenson and
Cole 2018), it is argued here that one such line of muchneeded research is to determine whether a new form of
audit process could be used that is better able to detect
modern slavery, alleviating at least some of the pitfalls associated with the approach. We therefore seek to answer the
following research question:
How can audits be improved to better detect modern slavery in
the supply chain, and how can an appropriate remediation plan
be established when modern slavery is discovered?

To answer the above research question, we present
empirical evidence from an action research project in the
textiles and fashion industry with a multi-billion pound (GBP)
turnover company, hereafter referred to as Buyer A. The first
implementation of an audit process targeted at modern slavery detection at a high-risk factory in South East Asia
(Supplier) is investigated, beginning with the initial preparation for the audit through to the post-audit follow-up. The
first author was actively engaged in this process, which
involved Buyer A collaborating with a large multinational
NGO (NGO A) and another of Supplier’s key customers
(Buyer B). Together, Buyer A and Buyer B represent 80% of
Supplier’s business and Buyer B was invited to observe the
audit process and add leverage. Empirical evidence is then
used to understand Buyer A’s ongoing remediation involving
a local NGO (NGO B).
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. First,
a review of the relevant literature is provided in Section 2.
The research method is then outlined in Section 3 followed

1137

by the findings in Section 4, which are then discussed in
Section 5. The paper is drawn together in a conclusion in
Section 6, including implications for practice and
future research.

2. Literature review
The literature review is divided into three sections. The first
section looks at transparency in supply chains, given that
supplier audits are a means of gaining transparency. The
second section focuses on detection using supplier auditing,
i.e. one of the main tools employed in practice for achieving
supply chain transparency (Egels-Zanden, Hulthen, and Wulff
2015), by reviewing the prior literature to understand the
suitability of auditing for the context of modern slavery and
identify the pitfalls associated with the approach. The third
section focusses on remediation.

2.1. Transparency in supply chains
Although there is extant literature concerning supply chain
transparency in terms of information disclosure between a
buyer and supplier, there is limited literature on the public
disclosure of supply chain information (Doorey 2011; Mol
2015). Some of these studies have considered voluntary disclosure when there is no regulation but stakeholder pressure
(e.g. Doorey 2011; Kozlowski, Searcy, and Bardecki 2015;
Gualandris et al. 2015) and evaluated its impact on competitiveness (Chen and Slotnick 2015). For example, Doorey
(2011) considered the steps that led companies such as Nike
and Levi Strauss & Co. to voluntarily expose their supplier
lists (e.g. NGO pressure) and although the research did not
analyse whether this has led to improved conditions in factories, it is suggested that this level of transparency should
encourage better management of labour practices.
Given the new modern slavery legislation, there has been
an increase in supply chain transparency through the disclosure of information within the annual statements published,
as analysed for 101 organisations in the textiles and fashion
industry by Stevenson and Cole (2018). This work identified
how organisations are detecting and remediating modern
slavery in terms of what they have decided to publically disclose. It provides a breadth of understanding but it is unable
to go into any depth on a particular organisation. Further, it
is only able to report on what organisations chose to disclose about what they are doing. It is concluded that further
in-depth research, such as using engaged research
approaches, is needed to study first-hand some of the practices that companies are claiming to use to increase
transparency.
Appropriate actions to improve transparency have been
discussed by many authors, including Macchion et al. (2018)
and Cole and Aitken (2019). The former include supplier
audits as a means of gaining transparency. They suggest that
companies with the most advanced strategies for achieving
sustainability in fashion supply chains use audits to verify the
supplier’s respect for environmental and social goals. In contrast, the latter argue that transparency is better gained by

1138

A. V. BENSTEAD ET AL.

suppliers being more forthcoming and willing to share objectives, thereby striving for mutual goals, and that this would
reduce the need for audits. However, Cole and Aitken (2019)
fall short of arguing that the need for audits will be eliminated altogether, and thus as both of these recent empirical
papers suggest that audits are an ongoing means of gaining
transparency, it is argued here that appropriate use of audits
is in need of further research particularly in the context of
modern slavery.

2.2. Detection
2.2.1. Supply chain auditing background
There is a substantial body of literature on global supply
chains, value chains, and networks in relation to labour
exploitation (LeBaron, Lister, and Dauvergne 2017; Crane
et al. 2019). This has, for example, discussed policies and
legislation, supply chain dynamics and business models. This
research identifies a number of current practices that seek to
improve labour standards throughout the supply chain. For
example, Barrientos (2008) reported that retailers and buyers
have introduced codes of conduct for suppliers as a result of
NGO pressure to improve labour standards when state regulation is insufficient to protect workers and law enforcement
is weak. These codes of conduct are commonly used to manage, monitor, and control suppliers through auditing against
the code (Helin and Babri 2015; Jiang 2009; Pedersen and
Andersen 2006). They are also referred to as the ‘compliancebased paradigm’ (Lund-Thomsen and Lindgreen 2014).
Advocates such as NGOs have legitimised audits as necessary
forms of governance encouraging improved standards whilst
sustaining good buyer/supplier reputations (LeBaron, Lister,
and Dauvergne 2017).
A standard social audit applies public or private standards
by investigating working conditions within a factory by touring the site, reviewing documents, and interviewing workers
to further understand employee wages and benefits, working
hours, harassment, health and safety, and the use of child
labour (Huq, Stevenson, and Zorzini 2014; Helin and Babri
2015). These can be announced or unannounced to uncover
the real conditions in a factory and conducted by brands
internally, NGOs or third-party auditors (O’Rourke, 2003;
Locke, Qin, and Brause 2007; Huq, Stevenson, and Zorzini
2014; Winter and Lasch 2016) yet they have a number of
shortcomings, as discussed below.

2.2.2. Shortcomings of supply chain auditing
Although supplier audits and certifications are common practice for monitoring supply chains, there is increasing scepticism around their effectiveness (LeBaron, Lister, and
Dauvergne 2017). On the one hand, the extant literature provides evidence that they can have a positive impact by
adhering to or exceeding the minimum wage, improving
health and safety, reducing overtime (Barrientos and Smith
2007), and improving productivity (Huq, Stevenson, and
Zorzini 2014). However, research also suggests that audits
that take place to ensure codes of conduct are adhered to

are not always sufficient for identifying issues and improving
working conditions (Huq, Stevenson, and Zorzini 2014; LundThomsen and Lindgreen 2014; Egels-Zanden, Hulthen, and
Wulff 2015).
Multiple studies have recognised the implications of a
‘top down approach’ whereby brands impose western standards on suppliers in developing countries operating in different cultural and socio-economic conditions by applying their
standardised codes in various different countries (EgelsZanden, Hulthen, and Wulff 2015; Helin and Babri 2015; Huq
and Stevenson 2020). Further, this encourages a ‘tick box’
process which has been proven to misrepresent the conditions of a factory resulting in ‘passed’ audits that have later
been found to have serious violations (LeBaron and Lister
2015; Outhwaite and Martin-Ortega 2019). There is also reference to ‘audit fatigue’ (Marshall et al. 2016) due to the constant auditing that factories face from their multiple
customers. Additionally, suppliers are often responsible for
the payment of audits (and follow-up audits to check noncompliances have been corrected) whilst being under the
threat of order volume being withdrawn for non-compliant
behaviour (Jiang 2009). Furthermore, the lack of consistency
amongst codes of conduct can result in ‘compliance limbo’
due to conflicting brand requirements – a commonly used
example of this is the different height expectations for fire
extinguishers (Locke, Qin, and Brause 2007). Buyers’ poor
communication with suppliers limits their ability to fully
understand such challenges resulting in suppliers playing a
passive role. Additionally, suppliers are often overwhelmed,
receiving limited support to fully understand and meet codes
of conduct and the subsequent lengthy audit corrective
action plans (Gould 2005; Jiang 2009).
Research has considered how current auditing strategies
lead to mock compliance. Jiang (2009) for example developed and tested a conceptual model that uses transaction
cost economics to explain the risk of market governance that
encourages a culture of ‘passing the audit’ through dishonesty rather than improving standards. Suppliers commit audit
fraud by hiding information through the falsification of documents, keeping separate records for auditors (double booking), and coaching workers for interviews (Egels-Zanden
2007; Jiang 2009; Huq, Stevenson, and Zorzini 2014;
Plambeck and Taylor 2016; Huq and Stevenson 2020). For
example, in their research on socially sustainable practices in
the garment industry in Bangladesh, Huq and Stevenson
(2020, p437) provided empirical evidence of mock compliance which has been categorised into ‘hiding violations,
short-term superficial conformance, and blatant cheating’.
However, they also found that this was sometimes overlooked by buyers due to the difficulty of eradicating some
issues. Instead, a developmental approach is taken to avoid
further deceit. Furthermore, in their previous research Huq,
Stevenson, and Zorzini (2014) found that suppliers in
Bangladesh claimed buyers were only interested in improving their reputation and avoiding bad publicity rather than
being serious about addressing social sustainability concerns.
Similarly, authors have considered the limitations due to conflict of interest. For example, the risk of in-house auditors

PRODUCTION PLANNING & CONTROL

not disclosing violations and the limited reliability of thirdparty auditors given that they may rely on continuing to
work with the lead firm (O’Rourke, 2003; Locke, Qin, and
Brause 2007).
The tone of the above discussion on mock compliance
could be argued to imply that the blame for ongoing modern slavery concerns in the supply chain lies entirely with the
suppliers. To counter this implication, it is important to also
draw on the extant literature that addresses issues of power
in the supply chain in the context of an audit. This literature
indicates that the textiles and fashion industry has experienced extensive offshoring as a result of buyers in developed
countries (the global north) sourcing from developing countries (the global south) in search of lower costs (Christopher,
Lowson, and Peck 2004; Barrientos, Kothari, and Phillips
2013). This has led to Northern powerful buyers introducing
codes of conduct to address labour conditions in the global
south (Lund-Thomsen and Lindgreen 2014; Ozkazanc-Pan
2019). Drebes (2016) refers to this as the ‘powerful and the
powerless’, and it has been argued that such imbalances in
power can have an impact on raising labour standards and
lead to forced labour (Crane et al. 2019). Through their purchasing practices, buyers exert pressure on their suppliers to
both meet their commercial and social standards (Gereffi
1999; Banerjee 2014). Amongst others, Barrientos (2008) has
therefore argued that this imbalance of power needs to be
acknowledged when considering corporate social responsibility practices. The power asymmetry can be seen in the
‘paternalistic perspective’ of codes of conduct implemented
by buyers and their understanding of what they believe to
be ‘in the best interests of the workers’ (Barrientos and Smith
2007, 725). Furthermore, it is widely acknowledged that different buyers have their own audit procedures and the less
powerful suppliers are often not included in the planning of
how an audit should be conducted or unable to provide
input into determining what measures are achievable (Huq,
Stevenson, and Zorzini 2014; LeBaron, Lister, and Dauvergne
2017). Gould (2005) thus refers to suppliers as ‘passive players’ in the auditing process. The disproportional power balance therefore affects the workers, and this compliance
approach does not empower them or help them to have
their voice heard (Barrientos and Smith 2007).
From a modern slavery perspective, there is a growing
body of evidence suggesting that auditing is ineffective. In
line with the broader discussion on power imbalances summarised above, there is, for example, concern that such
audits are biased, benefiting the powerful organisation rather
than sufficiently addressing labour exploitation within complex global supply chains (LeBaron, Lister, and Dauvergne
2017). Research has highlighted that audits are limited in
scope and do not highlight cases of modern slavery, especially in the case of the more vulnerable casual and migrant
workers (Barrientos, Kothari, and Phillips 2013; New 2015).
These workers are often recruited through exploitative thirdparty recruitment agencies (Barrientos, Kothari, and Phillips
2013), and these agents are outside the scope of standard
supplier audits (LeBaron and Lister 2015). Audits measure
what is happening at one moment in time within the factory

1139

and further research is needed to consider the wider context
of how a worker has entered the factory, to identify potential
modern slavery risks. Modern slavery therefore expands the
scope of a standard ‘one-size-fits-all’ audit procedure
(Barrientos, Kothari, and Phillips 2013; Gold, Trautrims, and
Trodd 2015; New 2015) and there is a clear need to research
whether a new audit process can be used to detect modern
slavery whilst taking into account the issues outlined above.

2.2.3. Improving the auditing process
The extant literature argues that the current auditing system
needs improving by shifting from ‘arm’s length’ auditing
through market governance to supplier development (Gould
2005; Pedersen and Andersen 2006; Lund-Thomsen and
Lindgreen 2014). Increased involvement from buyers has
been encouraged, improving a supplier’s ability to understand codes of conduct and implement any required corrective action. In their study, Huq, Stevenson, and Zorzini (2014)
found that supplier development was well received by suppliers and concluded that a combination of monitoring, trust,
and development were required. Similarly, Jiang (2009) and
Egels-Zanden, Hulthen, and Wulff (2015) claimed that a combination of monitoring and cooperation is needed. Jiang
(2009) argued that long-term contracts alone will not lead to
supplier commitment to codes of conduct and instead a
partnership approach is encouraged whereby suppliers play
a more active role in establishing achievable targets and are
provided with assistance in meeting them. Lund-Thomsen
and Lindgreen (2014) referred to the ‘co-operation model’
that encourages a developmental approach amongst multistakeholder networks, e.g. NGOs, working with buyers and
suppliers to improve social standards through monitoring
and training. There is also evidence of buyers partnering
with NGOs to oversee audits. Plambeck and Taylor (2006)
argued that the supplier is less likely to commit audit fraud
in the presence of an NGO. Similarly, in their conceptual
model of modern slavery supply chain challenges, Gold,
Trautrims, and Trodd (2015) drew attention to supplier development and also highlighted the need for researchers to
investigate the benefit of collaboration, e.g. with NGOs, for
the detection of modern slavery. The literature for example
acknowledges the mediating effect that NGOs can have to
help move beyond a top down approach (Barrientos and
Smith 2007). Such research should however also consider the
impact of the power of third party collaborators (Banerjee
2014). For example, LeBaron, Lister, and Dauvergne (2017)
highlighted the increased power of NGOs as a result of the
‘audit regime’ as well as the profit that they can make.
Overall, there is agreement that workers’ voices must also
be heard (Prieto-Carr
on et al. 2006). Outhwaite and MartinOrtega (2019) refer to this as ‘worker driven monitoring’ and
encourage the involvement of workers throughout the process from the design of improvement initiatives through to
remediation. For example, they consider the importance of
empowering workers through training enabling them to recognise and identify violations. Further investigation is however needed to understand how this model can be
developed in practice. Therefore, given the pitfalls of

1140

A. V. BENSTEAD ET AL.

auditing, there is scope to research how the process can be
improved and whether alternative approaches are suitable
for detecting modern slavery.

2.3. Remediation
Company responses to the detection of slave labour have
not been addressed at length within the extant literature –
an exception being the identification of remediation
practices in a review of recently published modern slavery
statements in the UK (Stevenson and Cole 2018). Action
plans and follow-up audits have for example taken place for
non-compliant suppliers. Additionally, organisations have
engaged in firm level and supplier level development such
as remediation training and collaboration with other buyers
and NGOs. But further research is needed that examines firsthand how organisations are approaching remediation when
modern slavery is detected.
More broadly in the SSCM literature, authors have identified actions in response to social issues in supply chains such
as the termination of business, increased auditing to check
on improvements, and supplier development, e.g. training
(Jiang 2009; Gimenez and Tachizawa 2012; Blome, Hollos,
and Paulraj 2014; Sancha et al. 2015; Zhang, Pawar, and
Bhardwaj 2017). There is also the suggestion that auditing
could be eliminated through stronger collaboration with suppliers (Awaysheh and Klassen 2010). Additionally, Pagell and
Wu (2009) have considered collaboration with NGOs, regulators, competitors and members of the community. There is
however limited research on collaboration with NGOs from a
social sustainability perspective (Zorzini et al. 2015) with
such research focussing instead on environmental sustainability (e.g. Albino, Dangelico, and Pontrandolfo 2012;
McDonald and Young 2012). An exception is in the context
of the Bangladesh garment industry. Following the Rana
Plaza disaster, Huq, Chowdhury, and Klassen (2016) found
that buyers had engaged with NGOs in joint initiatives to
improve industry social standards, e.g. training and skills
development for workers. Additionally, buyer-consortium
audits have been developed involving multiple buyers, and
both global and local unions supported by NGOs (Huq,
Chowdhury, and Klassen 2016; Huq and Stevenson 2020).
These have extended buyer audit capabilities by sharing
capabilities to audit fire, electrical and structural safety standards to improve a supplier’s social performance.
In the context of modern slavery, Gold, Trautrims, and
Trodd (2015) drew attention to supplier development and
highlighted the opportunities to study collaboration, e.g.
with NGOs, for the remediation of modern slavery.
Meanwhile, New (2015) argued that modern slavery remediation is distinctly different, highlighting that the illegality of
modern slavery means that the conventional top down
‘improvement notice’ response to audit non-compliances are
impractical, instead requiring the involvement of authorities
and the termination of business. Yet, Stevenson and Cole
(2018) found there were few instances of organisations
reporting violations to authorities in their modern slavery
statements. Gold, Trautrims, and Trodd (2015) also

considered the detrimental socio-economic effects that could
result from withdrawal from a region or country and, as a
result, recommended supplier development. There are therefore contrasting views in terms of how firms should remediate modern slavery. Further, although remediation practices
have been identified from publicly disclosed statements
(Stevenson and Cole 2018), this is limited to the evidence
that organisations have chosen to share. There is therefore
scope to develop a deeper and richer understanding of the
remediation process that is taking place following the identification of modern slavery.
Research has also considered the role of the buying firm
and their purchasing practices that can inadvertently lead to
exploitation (Barrientos 2008). Anner (2019) for example
investigated this in the Bangladesh garment export sector
and considered the demand for low prices, lead time pressure and order volatility which results in ‘squeezing workers’
rights’. New (2015) argued that modern slavery is ‘generated
by the normal system’ by referring to the ‘right hand’ establishing corporate social responsibility policies whilst the ‘left
hand’ can cause modern slavery due to commercial purchasing practices. Stevenson and Cole (2018) also identified
organisations disclosing that they had introduced purchasing
practices training as part of their modern slavery remediation
and suggested that modern slavery legislation could encourage awareness beyond the procurement function to the
boardroom level. This supports findings in the SSCM literature that consider the need to embed sustainability into
organisations with support from top management (Pagell
and Wu 2009; Pagell and Shevchenko 2014). Thus, modern
slavery remediation requires investigation as part of due diligence within SSCM and research needs to understand how
this is addressed given the commercial power of retailers
and brands (Gereffi 1999).
There are therefore two important research gaps:
1.

2.

To investigate audit methods and explore whether better approaches can be found for the detection of modern slavery.
To understand the strategies that firms employ when
modern slavery is detected.

In addressing these research gaps, it will be important to
consider how to balance the concepts of monitoring, trust
and development (Huq, Stevenson, and Zorzini 2014);
whether NGOs can be effectively engaged in deploying these
concepts, and how the role of power and control plays out
amongst the various stakeholders (LeBaron, Lister, and
Dauvergne 2017); and whether it is possible to more readily
hear the workers’ voice (Prieto-Carr
on et al. 2006) in the context of modern slavery detection and remediation.

3. Research method
3.1. Action research approach
This study has used action research, a qualitative approach
that has become increasingly prevalent in the study of

PRODUCTION PLANNING & CONTROL

organisations. It involves the engagement of the researcher
and assumes social phenomena are continuously changing
(Coughlan and Coghlan 2016; Easterby-Smith et al. 2018).
Coughlan and Coghlan (2016) describe action researchers as
‘outside agents who act as facilitators of the action and reflection within an organisation’. Therefore, in contrast to other
approaches, the researcher does not keep a distance from
the subject being researched and often participates in the
change process, thus enabling deep learning about the
organisation (McKay and Marshall 2001; Easterby-Smith et al.
2018). The researcher is therefore simultaneously taking
action
and
creating
knowledge
(Coughlan
and
Coghlan 2016).
In the context of SSCM, there have been calls for
researchers to use innovative engaged methodologies such
as action research (Touboulic and Walker 2016). Arguably
this is particularly important when investigating a complex
social issue such as modern slavery. Action research is fundamentally about change, with this research focussed on
changing the audit process. There were two objectives, the
action itself in terms of the audit process and reflection on
this as it happened (Coughlan and Coghlan 2016).
Adopting this research approach has enabled the gathering of rich data and access to privileged information, including Buyer A’s detailed plans regarding modern slavery
detection and remediation involving collaboration with Buyer
B, NGO A and NGO B. This was facilitated by the first author’s
previous relevant international industry experience, which
enabled trust to be built quickly. It also meant that there
was the necessary level of expertise to enable the gathering
of detailed information from the outset. The researcher was
also mindful of power imbalances and has had extensive
experience building relationships with international suppliers
and interacting with factory workers (Sultana 2007;
€
Ozkazanç-Pan
2008). It is important to acknowledge the positionality of the researcher as a white western female
researcher, yet the first author’s previous international industry experience and time spent living in a less developed
country, has shaped her world view. This positionality has
therefore influenced the fieldwork and the development of
the paper providing insights into the perspectives of local
people living and working in the global south and experience in gaining the trust of factory workers in this context
(England 1994). It is argued that action research has resulted
in access to sensitive information that would not have been
achieved through an alternative method such as case study
research. This is due to the ability to participate in the action
taken to tackle modern slavery within the focal company,
Buyer A.
The level of trust and strength of the relationship resulted
in the first author participating in the targeted modern slavery audit in South East Asia. Action research enabled the
researcher to be fully engaged in the trip, which also
involved interviewing the migrant workers. This meant the
researcher had the same level of involvement as Buyer A’s
employees, which then led to in-depth discussions due to a
mutual understanding of the experience. As a result, the
researcher learnt from first-hand conversations with the

1141

supplier and migrant workers rather than hearing secondhand accounts from Buyer A. This helped to mitigate any
power imbalances in the interpretation of information. The
researcher was actively involved in the audit planning, the
audit itself (including all team briefing, interview preparation
and debriefing sessions), and many of the post-audit remediation activities. For example, the audit protocol was cocreated (see Appendix) as was the ‘Modern Slavery Toolkit’
produced at the remediation stage. Additionally, the
researcher was involved in shaping the public reporting of
the audit in Buyer A’s modern slavery statement. There was
therefore an awareness of the power of the researcher
throughout the process and, for example, their involvement
in allowing the workers to express their own views
(Sultana 2007).
Action research is an emergent process (Coughlan and
Coghlan 2016). Although the project was outlined at the
beginning, it was uncertain how Buyer A’s approach to modern slavery would unfold. Thus the action was motivated and
determined by the research, and Buyer A actively sought the
collaboration of research partners given the need to develop
new ways of working. It was therefore important for the
researcher to gather all information and be adaptable as the
project progressed. The targeted audit emerged as one of
five initiatives developed as part of the research and the
chosen supplier was identified through a risk matrix cocreated by the researcher.
To prevent researcher bias, regular fortnightly meetings
took place with all three researchers and quarterly meetings
took place between the researchers and a key representative
from Buyer A. Thus, whilst one researcher was heavily involved
with Buyer A, the other two had less contact enabling them to
look out for signs of the first researcher ‘going native’ and to
counteract any such issues that arose. Quarterly reports were
also prepared, allowing the researchers to feedback on key
findings. This helped to ensure there was cyclical analysis
between data and theory. Additionally, the work was presented to external audiences at the university and international
conferences to step back from the field and discuss the work
with those not involved in the research.

3.2. The focal company: Buyer A
The researchers have engaged with the evolving modern
slavery detection and remediation practices of Buyer A, a UK
based, multi-billion pound turnover company in the textiles
and fashion industry. This company was chosen as it is in an
industry characterised by complex, global supply chains and
high labour intensity, which makes it vulnerable to modern
slavery. The nature of the relationship was such that, in
effect, one of the researchers worked part-time for Buyer A
over a 20-month period (on an expenses only basis, without
being employed).

3.3. Data collection
Much of the data collection surrounds the first implementation of Buyer A’s newly developed audit process targeted at

1142

A. V. BENSTEAD ET AL.

Table 1. Summary of participants.
Organisation
Buyer A

Buyer B
NGO A
Supplier

Role

Mnemonic

Head of Ethical Trade
Head of Sourcing
Corporate Responsibility (CR) Manager UK
Corporate Responsibility (CR) Manager Asia
Corporate Responsibility (CR) Officer Asia
Corporate Responsibility (CR) Officer Asia
Researcher
Head of Corporate Responsibility (CR) Asia
Capability Building Manager
Programme Manager
Translators x 4
CEO
Chief Sales Officer
HR Pay Managers
Documents Manager
Internal Auditor
Internal Translator
Workers x 23

BA1
BA2
BA3
BA4
BA5
BA6
BA7
BB1
NGOA1
NGOA2
NGOA3 to NGOA6
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7 to S30

modern slavery detection; inclusive of the initial preparation,
through to the follow up. This targeted audit was both a live
investigation and a capability building exercise for Buyer A and
thus involved a study of modern slavery detection in ‘real
time’ at a high-risk factory (Supplier). It should be noted that
Supplier had experience in implementing social responsibility
requirements and had previously passed their last standard
social audit. However, it was identified as high risk due to it
employing a large proportion of international migrant workers.
It was not however a staged audit as the supplier did not
know what was being investigated or how this would be
done. This was the first time that they had been through a
focussed assessment of their recruitment and on-site management of migrant workers. The audit took place following a
modern slavery training programme, again delivered by NGO
A, an experienced independent expert in this area, and consequently the team from Buyer A were well prepared. The audit
team consisted of 14 people: seven from Buyer A (including
one researcher, members from their UK and Asia based CR
team, and the Head of Sourcing); six from NGO A (from their
South East Asia team); and one from Buyer B. For the purpose
of the trip and when participating in the audit (including the
interviewing of workers), the researcher was introduced as a
member of Buyer A. A summary of all participants is provided
in Table 1, which also indicates the mnemonics used to refer
to participants hereafter.
Data collection took place before, during and after the
audit. The audit itself involved one of the researchers, in
month 10 out of the 20-month period, travelling to South
East Asia with the company’s Corporate Responsibility (CR)
team. The researcher was fully immersed in this trip, spending 5 full days as part of the audit team. In addition to the
audit itself, the researcher also spent time with the team during the evenings allowing for more informal discussions.
Informal discussions and internal meetings involving Buyer A
and NGO A were audio recorded. Due to confidentiality reasons, any meetings that took place at Supplier or with members of their team were not audio recorded and instead
written notes were taken. The same applies to the audit
itself. Additionally, the researcher interviewed two of the
supplier’s migrant workers and, due to confidentiality and

the sensitive nature of the discussion, these were only documented in written form rather than being audio recorded. All
interviewees were selected by the audit team from a master
list of employees provided by the supplier.
The final audit process given in Table 2 below summarises
the data collection opportunities during the 5 day period.
However, it is important to note that this audit process is
also a finding of the project given that it was co-created by
the audit participants and that this schedule evolved as the
week progressed. Thus the researcher was very much
involved in adapting it during that week, leading to the final
audit protocol given in Appendix and referred to in the findings. This audit process involved the investigation of the
end-to-end recruitment process using a parallel structure to
provide triangulation. Thus, the audit team members were
grouped into sub-teams, which were spread across three parallel sessions on Day 2 and two parallel sessions on Day 3.
As shown in Table 2, the audit began on Day 1, when the
management from Buyer A, NGO A and Supplier met to
outline the scope and provide an overview of the schedule,
ensuring that all parties understood the planned process.
The main audit assessment took place over days 2 and 3 followed by a closing meeting on Day 4. Finally, the Buyer A
team met on Day 5 for final reflections.
Following the audit, the researcher was involved in the
remediation process for the remaining 10 months. The
remediation process is ongoing and further evidence of
remediation has been collected from the company since the
end of the action research project.
Overall, the key data collection methods include: audit participation, observations, interviews, documentation and using
diaries to record key aspects of the process for operationalising
due diligence. A summary of the key data obtained is provided
in Table 3. Over the 20-month period, additional dialogue took
place relating to the audit during wider discussions relating to
the company’s response to modern slavery legislation. These
discussions are all recorded in the diary entries.
Rigour has been addressed by engaging in multiple cycles
of action using the framework outlined by Coughlan and
Coghlan (2016). Each cycle contains a pre-step that involves
understanding the rationale for action and four main steps
involving constructing, planning action, taking action, and
evaluating action. Monitoring and reflection has taken place
throughout given that a key characteristic of action research
is questioning all aspects of the research through the process
of evaluation or reflection (N€aslund, Kale, and Paulraj 2010).
The action research project can be considered one major
cycle (the response to modern slavery legislation) with two
minor cycles: detection and remediation (i.e. representing
the main unit of analysis) taking place within the project
(Coughlan and Coghlan 2016). The audit itself was a cyclical
process. It was a reflective process throughout with a
feedback loop built into the audit that involved a series of
de-briefs between Buyer A and NGO A. This helped cross-reference findings and identify any changes to the audit process needed to follow up on key issues raised, which then
fed into the next cycle. For example, the number of worker
interviews was increased during the audit week after

PRODUCTION PLANNING & CONTROL

1143

Table 2. Audit summary.
Day 1
Pre-Assessment Meeting with Audit Team Management & Supplier Management
Ensured the supplier was clear on the structure of the audit and plan for the week.
Pre-audit assessment questions.
Audit Team Preparation Meeting
Ensured the audit team were clear on the structure of the audit and plan for the week.
Day 2
Team 1 Management Interviews
Conducted a group interview with middle management focussed on the following:
1. Recruitment, selection and hiring including the use of labour agencies.
2. Corresponding documentation and worker files.
Team 2 Documents Review
Reviewed the following:
1. Company policies
2. Employment contracts
3. Documentation and records
4. Any retained employee property
Team 3 Worker Interviews
Interviewed a large sample of workers, skewed towards migrant employees focussing on the following:
1. How workers were recruited
2. Worker documentation
3. Working conditions
4. Social habits
Day 3
Team 1 Management Interviews
Conducted a group interview with middle management focussed on confirming any open issues and requested any additional documentation to support
the findings.
Team 2 Worker Interviews
Interviewed additional workers. Particular focus was given to any open issues, or document irregularities that required clarification.
Day 4
Closing Meeting
Presentation of audit findings (including any areas of good practice) to the supplier’s management team.
Day 5
Buyer A Reflections Meeting
Final reflections of audit process.

Table 3. Summary of key data collected.
Data
Audio Recordings
Diary Notes
Audit Protocol (Researcher Version)
Buyer A Internal Audit Protocol
NGO Findings and Recommendations Report
Buyer A Modern Slavery Report 2017
Buyer A Modern Slavery Report 2018
Modern Slavery Toolkit Development
Follow-up Remediation Interview Notes

Volume of data
62 pages of transcripts
63 pages
7 pages
8 pages
21 pages
26 pages
32 pages
15 pages
18 pages

reflecting on how much information had been gained from
the initial interviews. Further, this reflective practice helped
to evaluate the process and develop the audit protocol presented in Appendix. Within the detection cycle there has
therefore been a spiral of action research cycles (Coghlan
and Brannick 2014). Findings from the detection cycle then
fed into the remediation cycle. The remediation process has
evolved from the initial plan and is ongoing. For example,
the co-created modern slavery toolkit mentioned above
emerged after reflecting on remediation-related training – it
was first a pocket guide for staff then became a smartphone
application. There is therefore an ongoing spiral of action
taking place and changes being made as action is evaluated.

3.4. Data analysis
The data has been coded and organised into two main themes
– detection and remediation. This is further divided into

subthemes, which either emerged inductively from the data or
deductively from the literature. Each code was discussed, and
a final categorisation agreed amongst the researchers.
Tabulation using these subthemes aided the analysis
(Coughlan and Coghlan 2016), including the process of developing a series of vignettes, which are the primary vehicle used
to describe the detection related findings in Section 4.1 below.
Vignettes of this kind have been successfully employed
by other authors, such as McCarthy (2017). In her study of
a women’s empowerment programme in Ghana, the author
used vignettes to present the analysis of her findings,
blending accounts from her fieldwork with reflexivity and
conceptual analysis. Vignettes are described as ‘stories
about individuals and situations which make reference to
important points in the study of perceptions, beliefs, and attitudes’ (Hughes 1998: 381). They build a narrative through
reflexivity for interpreting the social world (Chaudhry, 2009)
and are argued to be an appropriate means of presenting
the findings of this project given the importance of reflexivity when taking an action research approach (Cassell and
Johnson 2006). They draw on a range of sources while
researchers advocate the importance of field notes to
develop personal accounts that can ‘bring life to research
[and] bring research to life’ (Ellis 1997, 4). Thus, the
vignettes presented below are written in the first person
to bring the data to life and demonstrate how the audit
process evolved, drawing extensively on diary notes. As
encouraged by Chaudhry (2009), direct quotations are
embedded in the dialogue supported by indirect retelling
of what people have said.

1144

A. V. BENSTEAD ET AL.

As discussed above, the process of data analysis that led
to the vignettes was aided by data tabulation. Initial coding
therefore involved tabulation of the empirical evidence for
each subtheme relating to modern slavery detection. A further three themes were later identified through studying
these extensive data tables leading to a second stage of coding used to categorise the findings into the three key themes
for the vignettes: (i) identifying indicators of modern slavery
through hearing the voice of the worker; (ii) supplier development focus rather than monitoring; and (iii) collaboration
with the NGO. Similarly, initial coding of the findings on
remediation involved tabulating the empirical evidence for
each subtheme relating to modern slavery remediation. A
second coding step was then used to categorise the findings
into the three key themes under which they are presented in
Section 4.2: ‘remediation actions’, ‘ongoing detection and
remediation: engagement with local NGO’ and ‘ongoing
detection and remediation: future audit plans’.

4. Findings
The findings from the detection phase are outlined in
Section 4.1 using vignettes before concluding with a summary of the indicators of modern slavery in Section 4.1.1.
Then, in Section 4.2, the findings related to the remediation
phase are presented.

4.1. Detection
Vignette 1: Finding Clues in Worker Voices

It is morning on Day 2 of the audit and I am excited for the
day ahead as I am interviewing two workers accompanied by
Buyer A’s UK CR Manager (BA3) and a translator from NGO A
(NGOA3) who can speak the migrant workers’ language.
Following a debrief yesterday, we discovered that the factory
is retaining the worker’s bank books, so we are aware that
we also need to investigate this issue. Management claimed
that this was for ‘safekeeping’ and to facilitate the process of
closing bank accounts when workers leave, but we need to
further understand the issues this causes.
Although we have an idea of the key information we
need to cover, each worker provides a different story, so
rather than asking a set list of questions (as is common in a
standard audit) we act upon leads like a detective. Later in
the week I discuss this interview technique with the team.
The CR Officer Asia (BA5) advises ‘We learnt how to interview
workers, not directly, we ask around that point e.g. [for the
worker’s] passport, we ask them have you seen the officer,
have you taken pictures, to see if they really booked in to get a
passport or someone helped them to get it’ (Day 5, reflection meeting).
The first worker nervously enters the room with stiff arms
down by his sides. He seems anxious and sits down, now
crossing his arms. I want to put him at ease – he looks cold,
so I check if he is warm enough and offer him a drink. I am
concerned the interview process could appear intimidating,
but I am impressed with NGOA3’s manner and her ability to
connect with the worker. It helps that she is the same

nationality as him. NGO A’s Capability Building Manager
(NGOA1) later explains: ‘[ … ] we have tried to use native
speakers, if you only have 20 minutes, the barrier that you
have to break if you are not even the same nationality, there
will be more walls to break. That is why we always like to use
native [speakers] and that is a constraint for internal auditors
having that kind of resource’ (NGOA1, Day 3. Post Audit
Assessment Meeting).
The worker claims he is 20 years old and has worked at
the factory for three years. His passport, which is in his possession, however indicates he is 22. This raises suspicion and
concern about the procedures in place to screen out child
labour risks. I feel a sense of sadness as he looks too young
to be away from his family. I am comforted to later learn
that his auntie works in the factory and his mother, sister
and brother work nearby. I make a note that NGOA3 is able
to provide country and regional specific data such as laws,
maps, and geographic information, all necessary when dealing with migration. I later discuss with BA3 about the
detailed regional specific information needed when compared to a standard audit. In particular, this was useful when
the interviewees discussed their travel movements and from
which location they had obtained documentation.
We move on from discussing the worker’s age. He
appears calmer, begins to smile and openly answers all of
our questions. He enjoys working here, he loves to sew (his
mother taught him when he was young) and we discussed
his aspirations to become a menswear fashion designer. He
explains that his parents arranged for him to migrate for
work and they managed the whole recruitment process
meaning he has little understanding of the details. He thinks
he has a contract with a broker but does not have a copy.
He does however remember his parents paying fees but he
does not recall signing any documentation. The workers
should not be paying fees and this is a key indicator and risk
of bonded labour.
We need to establish if the workers are being exploited.
Are their wages being withheld or deducted? Do they have
access to disposable income? We therefore discuss how he
spends his money, which is another example of a discussion
that would not take place in a standard audit. He is not sure
where his bank book is, but he confirms he has access to
money, of which he sends a considerable sum back to his
home country to help his family. It is sent via an agent; his
father pays a fee at the other end. We later compare his
experiences with those of other workers. Some other workers
reported that without their bank books, they are unable to
make bank transfers, which are more efficient and safer than
using agents.
I recall how earlier, at breakfast, BA3 had said how grateful she was that we would be conducting interviews
together. Now I understood why – it is emotionally draining.
We proceed into the second interview, but I feel tired from
having to think on my feet and to quickly process the previous interviewee’s responses. The second worker is older,
slightly more guarded but still fairly open. I think about how
nervous I would be in his position, being asked so many
questions. He is married and his wife also works at the

PRODUCTION PLANNING & CONTROL

factory. He has recently renewed his contract and, although
the process was quite unclear, we established that fees were
deducted from his wage. His wage slip is not in his language
though, so he has to get a colleague to translate it. He
advises that the office holds his bank book, but he does not
mind and can request it when needed. I recall our team
debrief at the hotel last night when NGOA3 shared her concern that the workers do not seem to understand the risks
of not being in possession of their own bank books. After
the interviews, the three of us have a brief discussion. We
agree that we learnt a lot from the worker interviews and
discuss the importance of asking the right questions to
gather the required information.
Vignette 2: Getting the
Developmental Approach

Supplier

On

Board

using

a

It is Day 1 of the audit and prior to starting the factory
investigation, we invite the Supplier management team to
our hotel to meet with NGO A and plan the week ahead. We
present the audit as a learning experience for both parties
(Supplier and Buyer A) and it is clear that this process will be
a partnership. The close relationship between the two parties
is evident and the meeting is relaxed and open. The management are friendly, willing and keep smiling. Buyer A’s
Head of Ethical Trade (BA1) and Head of Sourcing (BA2) both
stress that there is no commercial risk with regards to the
audit findings and any information that is shared will be in
order to enable learning, and Supplier will remain anonymous. We also discuss how the audit will inform Buyer A’s policy, improve standards and enhance understanding of risk.
BA1 also advises that the pilot will help build policy from the
supplier perspective: ‘we don’t want policy that suppliers find
hard to align – we need your help, we are UK based and not
manufacturing, so it is hard for us to make policy’.
The audit is presented as a general legal requirement to
be transparent. Supplier appears to understand this and
does not seem concerned. BA2 started the discussion regarding the audit several months ago. I later discuss this with
NGO A and she explains that ‘The next thing [in terms of why
the audit was regarded a success by NGOA] is how Buyer A
prepared Supplier [ … ] setting the tone that this is collaborative, this is working together, it is really very important but not
only communicating that but taking the time to prepare the
supplier for this process - that really contributed to the success’
(NGOA1, Day 4, informal conversation after closing meeting).
BA1 and BA2 outline why we are doing the audit, continually stressing the strategic learning partnership. NGOA
are briefly introduced as experts and BA1 explains that they
have previously delivered training for Buyer A. Supplier is
also advised that they are not being accused of exploiting
workers but that there could be issues relating to their journey to the factory. BA1 advises that they need Supplier to be
completely transparent and further stresses that there will be
no negative consequences or commercial risk: ‘whatever we
find we will work through with you’. We move on to discuss
the involvement of Buyer B who does not want to contribute
financially to the audit. It has been agreed that they can
observe the process on the condition that they ‘engage
[financially] in remediation’. I had learnt earlier in the day

1145

that they have been invited to add leverage as BA1 argued
that ‘There are not many factories in which we could influence
policy without the support of other customers … The more
leverage we have the more likely the supplier is to engage’
(BA1, Day 1, informal conversation with Buyer A’s
audit team).
It is the following day and I am in ‘Team 1’ conducting
interviews with Supplier’s management team. Their Chief
Sales Officer (S2) acts as a translator. At first Supplier’s management team appear knowledgeable and do not seem to
be discussing their responses with one another. But they
start to make contradictory statements, particularly relating
to recruitment fees. This sets alarm bells ringing and it
becomes clear that the workers are being charged. Supplier’s
management start to become more guarded and discuss
with one another before answering the questions. It begins
to get more frustrating with BA2 exclaiming: ‘I think they are
trying to confuse us’.
Buyer B helpfully begins to translate and we start to make
progress. However, BB1 becomes more confident and starts
to challenge Supplier’s management team. Although he asks
some good questions, this raises concern as Buyer A does
not want Supplier’s team to stop talking. BA1 speaks to BB1
discretely ensuring that he does not become too confrontational. We do however later acknowledge that S2 would not
have translated everything and we subsequently gained
more information through the translation services of Buyer B.
The audit is complete and we meet as a team (Buyer A
and NGOA) in the hotel to share our findings and plan our
approach for the closing meeting. To avoid unnecessary
resistance, we decide to focus on outlining the issues rather
than framing them as human trafficking. Instead, this level of
detail will be provided as the remediation plan is developed
in later meetings.
It is the following day; we are sitting in Supplier’s boardroom for the closing meeting to present our findings to their
management team. BA2 starts by outlining areas of good
practice thereby putting the supplier at ease. He follows this
by outlining the issues. Supplier’s CEO (S1) becomes quite
defensive as the issues are explained in more detail. BA1 and
BA2 adopt ‘good cop, bad cop’ roles and BA1 tries to relax
the supplier after the issues are raised. This approach works
and S1 begins to understand the issues and acknowledges
that he may be unaware of what is actually happening. BA1
adds: ‘If you [Supplier Management] did talk to workers at
length you would find this [indicators of modern slavery] out’.
He also reassures them adding ‘We are not accusing [the supplier], we are learning and making you aware of the risk for
you and us. You are our business partner, it is about working
together, it is both our responsibility to do the right thing’.
BA1 stresses that Supplier’s system is not robust enough
to identify risks and that there are communication issues
between workers and management. I note in my diary that
the meeting is progressing well due to the approach
between BA1 and BA2. BA2 takes the lead outlining the
issues and BA1 tries to be positive by proposing how issues
could be resolved. The rest of the meeting focuses on the

1146

A. V. BENSTEAD ET AL.

next steps and outlines a remediation plan involving
all parties.
The overall aim is to move away from a standard corrective action plan that leaves the supplier with a list of issues
to correct. Instead, we form a collaborative working group
consisting of members from Buyer A, Buyer B, and Supplier.
The aim of the group is to collectively agree the supplier
policy and process for future migrant recruitment. Buyer A’s
Head of Ethical Trade explained to Supplier: ‘We think you
will get more out of this from working with us, you will get to
input rather than us telling you – it’s your business’. He also
acknowledged the role of the buyer, claiming: ‘We will be
looking at purchasing practices to improve how the way we
work with you creates problems - last minute problems,
changes and no forecasts. We understand that we are involved
in this process’. I make a note that this statement further
emphasises the partnership approach that is being taken to
make improvements.
Vignette 3: NGO A: The Backbone that Held Us Together

It is the first day at the factory and although we spent
yesterday at our hotel planning with NGO A, this is our first
experience of formally working together. I am in ‘Team 10
conducting interviews with Supplier’s management team and
the value of having NGO A present immediately strikes me.
We ask the management team some questions and request
supporting documentation. I am given a number of documents to review and NGO A provide us with a helpful guide
to decipher the jargon. I am sat next to NGOA2 and I ask her
questions as I spot anomalies.
NGO A act as facilitator and guide us throughout the
audit process, allowing us to take the lead whilst providing
support and expertise. This is particularly helpful when we
sense any tensions from the Supplier’s management team. I
later discuss this with BA3 and she claims ‘I think NGO A was
really good, they’ve got loads of expertise and they were able
to facilitate it [the audit] really well and give direction. I liked
that they were hands off, actually I think it was good for us,
our development and use of initiative as well, not just being
told what to do mindlessly’ (BA3, Day 5, Reflections Meeting).
It is the following day and I am interviewing the migrant
workers. Before beginning, NGOA3 starts by giving some
pointers of certain issues we should cover, such as the worker’s recruitment process and their understanding of their
wages. Having NGOA3 present is such a great support. She
knows when to push for more details and when to move on.
At one point we try to establish a worker’s age and she
warns ‘he is getting nervous’. I also make a note that NGOA3
is able to provide country and regional specific data such as
laws, maps, and geographic information, all necessary when
dealing with migration.
We hit a stumbling block as we try to quickly piece
together the information we are being told. NGO A tells us
not to worry and reassuringly advises that we can verify this
in the documents later. As we uncover the anomalies,
NGOA3 reassures us that ‘it is very common that you find
issues on the first day which you go to follow up the next day
and then face new ones’ She tries to put our minds at rest

and explains ‘Lots of these things are due to no policy and
procedure so can be managed’.
We head back to the hotel and have a meeting with NGO
A to help prepare for tomorrow’s closing meeting. We spend
time reflecting on our findings, each discussing our concerns
in order to triangulate the information. At this stage we are
trying to establish whether we have enough evidence to call
the issue a genuine non-compliance or a risk that cannot
be validated.
It is the following day and I am in the closing meeting. I
accompany BA1 and BA2 and this is the only time during
the audit when my presence is only to observe. We decided
as a team yesterday that it was important not to overwhelm
the supplier and as a result the rest of Buyer A’s team
remain in the hotel. NGO A provide support throughout the
sometimes tense meeting, As the issues are revealed, the
supplier becomes defensive at which point NGOA1 whispers
to BA2 and prompts him to move to the next issue. At times
BA1 asks NGO A to provide more clarification. I note that the
presence of NGO A, an impartial actor, helps to provide additional leverage and credibility, particularly when the supplier
acts defensively. We later discuss this closing meeting: ‘The
other good thing about it, what we did today, is we could say
- this isn’t just us, this is NGO A and us agreeing, and they are
not us, they are independent experts’ (BA1, Day 3, informal
conversation with BA3 and BA7 after post-audit assessment meeting).
I later discuss the involvement of NGO A with Buyer A’s
team. We agree they were particularly helpful as we reflected
throughout the process. We, for example, had debriefs
throughout where we would each discuss our findings and
work out a plan for the next day. BA1 argues: ‘I think we
shouldn’t underestimate how hard we would have found it
[conducting the audit] on our own’. BA3 adds: ‘The findings
would have been ‘hard to swallow’ if they [NGO A] hadn’t
been there’ (BA3, Day 3, informal conversation with BA1 and
BA7 after post-audit assessment meeting).

4.1.1. Audit findings – a summary
Through the triangulation of information, the audit identified
15 issues, 7 of which were categorised as ‘inadequate procedures to detect or avoid modern slavery’, and 8 of which
were concluded to be ‘indicators of modern slavery’. These
issues are summarised in Table 4, although the full detailed
list of indicators is not provided for confidentiality reasons.
Thus, for example, Table 4 indicates evidence was found
that Supplier’s current procedures for ensuring there are no
document discrepancies were inadequate. BA1 confirmed
that: ‘Basic policies [are] in place but procedures are inadequate and not operationalised’. Further, there were issues
concerning the overall transparency of the end-to-end
recruitment process, particularly relating to the use of agents
for recruiting migrant workers. Gaps in policy, documented
processes, written procedures and their implementation were
therefore deemed to result in a risk of forced labour and trafficking. Although there was no evidence of under-age workers on site, there was also concern that inadequate
procedures were in place to screen out risks relating to child

PRODUCTION PLANNING & CONTROL

1147

Table 4. Categorised audit findings.
Audit findings
Inadequate Procedures to Detect or Avoid Modern Slavery

Indicators of Modern Slavery

7 indicators categorised as follows:
 Recruitment Process and Policy (6)
 Inadequate Grievance Procedures (1)

8 indicators categorised as follows:
 Payment of Recruitment Fees (1)
 Human Trafficking (2)
 Limited Freedom of Movement (4)
 Restricted Access to Wages (1)

labour such as ensuring that all supplied documentation was
authentic. Audit findings also revealed that workers paid
recruitment fees in excess of legal limits and procedures to
verify the fees paid by workers (via recruitment agents)
were inadequate.

 Improving transparency with third-party recruitment
agencies; and,
 Listening to reports from workers via the smartphone
application and responding accordingly in collaboration
with NGO B.

4.2. Remediation

4.2.2. Ongoing detection and remediation: Engagement
with a local NGO

In light of the above, the following subsections outline the
remediation that has subsequently taken place. The actions
are first summarised in Section 4.2.1 before sections 4.2.2
and 4.2.3 describe key ongoing actions relating to NGO collaboration and future audits in more detail.

4.2.1. Remediation actions
Buyer A took the initiative to work with Supplier, but unfortunately Buyer B did not engage as had initially been
expected in the closing meeting. It became evident that
Buyer B lags behind in its approach to sustainability as confirmed by BA1: ‘[Buyer B] is quite immature in terms of ethical
trade’. As a result, the working group (as outlined in Vignette
2 above) did not continue. Instead, in response to the audit
findings, Buyer A took the following action:
 Introduced new policies and provided guidance, to provide suppliers (including Supplier) with greater clarity on
Buyer A’s expectations for managing vulnerable and
migrant workers;
 Further developed their internal training by introducing a
Modern Slavery Toolkit to develop the skills of employees,
particularly those that are supplier-facing, relating to
spotting the signs of modern slavery;
 Partnered with a local South East Asia based NGO (NGO B)
who has helped to embed best practices in regional suppliers;
 Ran a seminar introducing the new policies and NGO B,
which was attended by all of Buyer A’s South East
Asian suppliers;
 Improved the worker voice through NGO B educating workers on their rights and enabling grievance reporting via the
introduction of a smartphone (whistleblowing) application.
As a result, Supplier worked closely with Buyer A and
NGO B to establish a plan and made significant improvements, such as:
 Compensating workers that had paid recruitment fees;
 Ceasing to charge workers recruitment fees;
 Updating policies and internal practices relating
to employment;

Although Buyer A initially partnered with a large multinational NGO for the targeted audit (NGO A), a local actor
for the remediation stage encouraged a ‘bottom up’
approach (NGO B). BA1 argued that working with NGO B is
helpful as: ‘We don’t have our own people on the ground’. For
an annual fee, the collaboration with NGO B aims to improve
practices by helping with policy development and implementation in their South East Asia supply chain. To achieve this,
they work closely with their suppliers, workers, and thirdparty recruitment agencies on a daily basis without the
involvement of Buyer A. Instead, Buyer A is sent a bi-annual
report and alerted if a supplier does not engage with the
NGO. However, Buyer A is not informed if there is a noncompliance, instead NGO B works collaboratively with the
supplier to resolve the matter.
Time is being spent educating workers so they understand their rights and are therefore able to recognise any
issues themselves. Progress is monitored by giving workers a
voice at all of Buyer A’s suppliers in South East Asia using
the aforementioned smartphone app. The app can also be
used by prospective employees to learn about suppliers and
recruitment agencies. NGO B combines this with conducting
supplier risk assessments and interviews workers to build a
picture of what is happening on a day-to-day basis. The
information is then shared with the supplier so that they can
work together to resolve any problems.

4.2.3.

Ongoing detection
audit plans

and

remediation:

future

The key findings from the targeted audit are helping to
shape future audits and establish an audit protocol (see
Appendix). The protocol provided in Appendix was used as a
starting point by Buyer A’s Asia based CR team to further
develop it for their own adoption in future audits. The Asia
based CR team work closely with all suppliers in the region
and take ownership of supplier development. The protocol is
a record of what took place during the audit and can be
used to replicate (and adapt) the audit to conduct targeted
investigations in other suppliers and countries as required.
Despite this, there is not an immediate plan to roll out the
targeted audit across the supply chain. One of the main

1148

A. V. BENSTEAD ET AL.

reasons being that it was resource intensive and costly. BA1
stated that ‘less is more’ and that it is important to ‘identify
the big issues and go deeper’ with the focus being on remediating the issues found in South East Asia. He added:
‘Everyone [all companies] should do a targeted audit to verify
risk’ and indicated that he felt that the targeted audit had
verified their internal risk assessment. He argued that: ‘The
board [of directors] are confident that we [as a company/CR
team] understand risk’. He also argued that this has not only
helped focus the business’s efforts but has also led to more
funds being made available as the board are now confident
that once issues have been found they can be remediated.
The co-created modern slavery toolkit has involved using
the audit findings to develop an internal training programme
for all levels of employees in all departments. Supplier-facing
employees are also provided with a printed pocket guide
(later developed into an app) to help them spot the signs of
modern slavery during supplier visits, and this provides information on worker appearance, behaviour and supplier working conditions. It is anticipated that this will be particularly
beneficial to designers and buyers who regularly visit factories but whose role may not normally lead them to engage
directly with social compliance.

5. Discussion
This study advances our knowledge on both modern slavery
detection and remediation. Firstly, in terms of detection, the
findings suggest a targeted audit can identify key modern
slavery indicators. It is however important to acknowledge
that the process may still have flaws and, in light of the current literature (Egels-Zanden 2007; Plambeck and Taylor
2016; LeBaron, Lister, and Dauvergne 2017), there is for
example no guarantee that workers were not coached to
reveal only the indicators management were comfortable
with (and not worse atrocities). Nonetheless, the findings
suggest this approach can overcome at least some of the
limitations of a standard audit. It focuses on the end-to-end
recruitment process, including reviewing third-party recruitment agency practices, migrant working conditions, and end
of contract repatriation, addressing some of the drawbacks
of the ‘one-size-fits-all’ generic audit referred to by New
(2015). The findings provide empirical evidence of the procedure followed, addressing the call to further understand
the process for a targeted audit (Gold, Trautrims, and Trodd
2015). Supporting Barrientos (2008), the imbalance of power
amongst the parties involved has also been considered when
developing and analysing the practices implemented.
The results have also highlighted the importance of collaboration with external parties (Buyer B, NGO A) during the
detection process (Plambeck and Taylor 2016; Gold,
Trautrims, and Trodd 2015), which has facilitated resource
sharing, increased leverage, and influenced the supplier’s
level of transparency and cooperation. The roles of power
and control were however evident amongst the various
stakeholders. Collaborating with another buyer can provide
leverage but there can be power imbalances that potentially
impact the openness of the supplier. However, an NGO can

act as mediator, as a support mechanism, and can also provide further leverage (Barrientos and Smith 2007). Their
involvement proved particularly useful for investigating a
new area such as modern slavery. In particular, their use of
regional managers and local translators helped to provide a
local view and awareness of the issues. This also helped to
improve the diversity of the audit team.
Although the targeted audit identified modern slavery
indicators, the findings also reveal the resource constraints
impacting its scalability, which has led to Buyer A exploring
other effective ways to detect and remediate modern slavery
in the long-term. Our study provides empirical evidence of
modern slavery remediation to support and extend the findings from secondary data analysis presented by Stevenson
and Cole (2018). Firstly, it is important to note that following
the identification of key indicators of modern slavery, Buyer
A did not terminate business with the supplier, which has
been identified as a response to issues in the SSCM literature
(Jiang 2009; New 2015). Supporting Gold, Trautrims, and
Trodd (2015), this was presumed to have a detrimental
impact on the supplier, workers, and wider community. In
fact, prior to the audit, Buyer A stressed to the supplier that
non-compliance would not result in the withdrawal of business. Further, Buyer A’s dependence on their supplier may
arguably have impacted this approach (Awaysheh and
Klassen 2010), and removing this risk encouraged the supplier’s commitment and transparency during the audit.
The findings demonstrate the monitoring versus development approach and suggest that a more collaborative partnership can be used to detect and remediate modern slavery
issues (Jiang 2009; Gold, Trautrims, and Trodd 2015). In fact,
the supplier played a more active role than has previously
been identified in the literature (Gould (2005; LeBaron, Lister,
and Dauvergne 2017). This was evident from the early
stages, including informing the supplier of audit plans
several months in advance and taking the time to have a
pre-assessment meeting for the management teams. This
meeting took place at Buyer A’s hotel which provided a
more relaxed, informal environment to put the supplier at
ease. From the beginning, the power dynamics at play were
softened to encourage working together, ensuring policy
was collectively agreed rather than the buyer telling the supplier what to do (Lund-Thomsen and Lindgreen 2014). There
was also acknowledgment from Buyer A that they were not
a manufacturer, making it difficult for them to determine
policy. Input was therefore needed from Supplier to ensure
that it was achievable. The involvement of Buyer A’s Asia
based CR team was also important as including the regional
team improved diversity, ensuring that Buyer A’s audit team
was not comprised only of Westerners. Their local experience
was invaluable and they were empowered to develop the
future audit protocol and solutions that would be applied in
the local context.
Buyer A’s remediation plan initially involved a collaborative working group consisting of members of Supplier, Buyer
A, and Buyer B, to operationalise a corrective action plan.
However, a longer-term plan has been put in place involving
a local NGO (NGO B) taking the lead to manage a ‘bottom-

PRODUCTION PLANNING & CONTROL

up’ day-to-day remediation process helping to implement
policy through supplier development. This is an alternative
solution to the standard ‘improvement notice’, which has
been questioned for its suitability during modern slavery
remediation by New (2015). This approach is a move away
from the compliance model focussed on monitoring that has
been criticised in the literature for encouraging mock compliance (Jiang 2009; Plambeck and Taylor 2016; Huq and
Stevenson 2020). Further, this replaces the ‘follow-up audit’
that has been identified in the prior literature as standard
practice after detecting non-compliance (Jiang 2009;
Stevenson and Cole 2018). Power has therefore been transferred to NGO B and Supplier to collectively resolve any
issues with minimal involvement from Buyer A. This is therefore a move away from the paternalistic behaviour often
demonstrated by powerful buyers (Barrientos and Smith
2007; Lund-Thomsen and Lindgreen 2014; OzkazancPan 2019).
Involving a local NGO in supplier development can therefore be seen as an alternative measure to eliminate the need
to re-audit and reduce audit fatigue (Awaysheh and Klassen
2010; Marshall et al. 2016). The findings therefore also add to
the limited research on collaboration with NGOs from a
social sustainability perspective (Zorzini et al. 2015) and provide further examples of their involvement in both worker
and supplier development, thereby supporting Huq,
Chowdhury, and Klassen (2016). This has involved working
with suppliers to develop documentation systems, policies,
and procedures. In particular, the findings reveal the importance of educating workers on their rights and whistleblowing achieved through the use of a smartphone application.
This helps to reduce the risk of deception that can take place
during audits if workers are coached or feel under threat
from their employers if they raise concerns (Egels-Zanden
2007; Plambeck and Taylor 2016). NGO B is also working
closely with recruitment agencies to develop an ethical
recruitment process, which provides an example of how a
company can tackle exploitative third-party recruitment
agencies (Barrientos, Kothari, and Phillips 2013). As a result,
NGO B is able to detect, mitigate, and remediate indicators
of modern slavery on a daily basis through building close
relationships with workers, suppliers, and recruitment agencies. Thus the findings provide evidence of how ‘workerdriven monitoring’ can be achieved in practice, as advocated
by authors such as Prieto-Carr
on et al. (2006) and Outhwaite
and Martin-Ortega (2019). Empowering workers in this manner has not only involved them being trained to further
understand their rights but ensures that they are actively
involved in the detection and remediation of modern slavery.
This helps to ensure that decisions are not solely made by a
more powerful party (e.g. a buyer or supplier), and their view
of what is in the workers’ best interest (Barrientos and
Smith 2007).
It should also be noted that investigating modern slavery
is ‘new territory’ for both brands and suppliers. It is therefore
anticipated that, in time, suppliers will understand which
processes will be investigated, which could arguably lead to
the falsification of documentation, and so on – leading to

1149

mock compliance and hiding violations, as evidenced in the
wider SSCM literature (e.g. Huq, Stevenson, and Zorzini 2014;
Huq and Stevenson 2020). Having a local NGO ‘on the
ground’ could however help to minimise this through
improving transparency, training workers, and developing
suppliers/recruitment agencies in sustainable practices.
Evidence also reveals action that has taken place to
remediate the specific issues found during the audit relating
to fees, such as paying compensation to workers. Further,
the audit has led to Buyer A seriously considering the impact
of their commercial power (Gereffi 1999; Anner 2019) and
consequently beginning the process of making internal
changes to their purchasing practices (Barrientos 2008; New
2015) as well as improving company-wide modern slavery
awareness through training and the development of a modern slavery toolkit. Modern slavery awareness is therefore
being embedded into the everyday practices (Pagell and
Shevchenko 2014). Further, the findings reveal that when the
detection and remediation process is perceived to be effective, this can strengthen top management support for integrating modern slavery awareness within the business
(Pagell and Wu 2009). In this research, the CR team of Buyer
A felt they had convinced their board of directors that, by
conducting a targeted audit, they understand the risks within
their supply chain and can remediate effectively.
Modern slavery is by no means simple to investigate
given its criminal nature. For Buyer A, this has been a learning experience. Conducting a targeted audit at a high risk
factory was a logical starting point which has subsequently
led to the development of their ‘bottom up’ worker-driven
approach. The audit has also helped to inform training and
the modern slavery toolkit as well as understanding what
steps needed to be taken for the whole supply chain. The
targeted audit has therefore played an important role in
both the detection and remediation process. Yet, the effectiveness of it has been underpinned by many factors such as
being able to hear the voice of the workers, the involvement
of multiple stakeholders and the subsequent power, control
and trust at play. The initial audit suggested that the workers
were too trusting of their employer, given that they were
not uneasy about their bank books being held by the office.
However, subsequent training of the workers through the
involvement of the local NGO can better aid workers in
understanding their rights thereby making them less vulnerable to exploitation and help them to be involved in the
detection and remediation process.

6. Conclusions
This paper started by asking ‘How can audits be improved to
better detect modern slavery in the supply chain, and how
can an appropriate remediation plan be established when
modern slavery is discovered?’ Action research has been
used within the textiles and fashion industry to understand
an attempt at modern slavery detection and the development of a remediation plan. This method has enabled the
gathering of rich qualitative data concerning a sensitive
high-profile issue, further advocating the use of innovative

1150

A. V. BENSTEAD ET AL.

research methods for researching SSCM (Touboulic and
Walker 2016).
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first empirical
paper to consider how modern slavery is being investigated
and remediated within a supplier factory. Whilst prior literature has highlighted the shortcomings of supply chain auditing and questioned the suitability of this approach for
detecting modern slavery, this paper suggests that a more
targeted audit can identify key indicators of modern slavery.
This type of audit includes investigating the end-to–end
recruitment process by using a parallel structure of management and worker interviews and documentation review. This
has also included the investigation of third-party recruitment
agency practices. Further, the audit involved collaborating
with another buyer and an NGO to add leverage, share
resources and develop capabilities. Although the targeted
audit is resource intensive and therefore its scalability can be
questioned, it is argued that companies could initially
engage in this level of investigation to develop their longterm plans for modern slavery detection and remediation.
The research also documents the evolving and ongoing
remediation process, which has led to collaboration with a
local NGO to support workers and develop suppliers. This
provides an alternative approach to remediation that simultaneously provides continual detection of the indicators of
modern slavery by focussing on day-to-day collaboration
with suppliers and workers, which in turn reduces reliance
on resource-intensive audits.
Given the issues of trust, power and control that can be
at play when investigating issues of a criminal nature, such
as modern slavery, this research has highlighted the need to
find appropriate ways to hear the worker voice during both
the initial audit and the ongoing detection and remediation.
Their voice is an essential part of understanding the reality
of their working environment. It is therefore important to
overcome the power asymmetries between the buyer, supplier, NGO and the workers. By using a collaborative, developmental approach with the supplier, the audit and ongoing
remediation has fostered trust between buyer and supplier,
which in turn fosters the supplier’s willingness for workers to
be involved in the process of detecting and then improving
standards. Whilst other studies have drawn attention to the
potential power of the buyer over the NGO, this study suggests that a collaborative partnership between buyers and
NGOs is also possible, and is more conducive to combatting
the modern slavery threat.

recruitment agencies. Conducting a targeted audit in a highrisk supplier is encouraged to help the business understand
risk, which will in turn help develop a process to detect and
remediate modern slavery. However, it is noted that this may
not be feasible on a larger scale.
A targeted audit can be facilitated by collaboration with
other buyers or non-business actors such as NGOs to help
provide mediation, leverage, share resources, and develop
knowledge and expertise. In particular, collaboration with
other buyers can help to address resource intensity and
develop a cohesive approach to resolving issues such as
modern slavery. It is also important for buyers to develop an
equal relationship with their suppliers, ensuring that a buyer
does not assume a more powerful position and exert pressure on suppliers to comply with policy that has only been
developed from the buyer’s perspective. Meanwhile, enlisting
the help of NGOs who are experts in modern slavery investigation can help to verify risks and provide country and
regional specific data such as laws and geographic information, which is key when investigating migrant labour. It may
however not always be feasible to have an NGO and/or
native speaker present. There may therefore be practical difficulties due to being unable to speak to workers in their own
language and build a rapport.
Companies should also consider collaborating with local
partners, including local NGOs, to facilitate ‘bottom-up’
detection and remediation by providing day-to-day ‘on the
ground’ support through developing and empowering workers and suppliers. Whistleblowing is encouraged by working
closely with workers and educating them on their rights so
they are able to request advice, report issues and assume a
more active role in the detection and remediation process.
This can be facilitated using an NGO-operated smartphone
application, providing the NGO with the means to verify
issues and resolve them with the supplier without alerting
the buyer.
It is also important for all factory-facing employees to
understand the causes and signs of modern slavery. Buyers
are therefore encouraged to focus on their internal processes
and embed modern slavery awareness throughout their company by improving purchasing practices and transparency,
and by providing internal training and resources to support
employees at all levels of the business. Developing a collaborative approach in the detection and remediation of modern slavery is meaningless if the buyer’s internal practices are
not continually reviewed.

6.1. Implications for practice

6.2. Limitations and future research

This paper will be of benefit to managers, particularly in the
textiles and fashion industry, aiding the improvement of
social sustainability in the context of recent modern slavery
legislation. The findings provide managers with a protocol
for designing a targeted modern slavery audit and developing a remediation plan, which is argued to be different from
the practices employed for other social issues due to the hidden and criminal nature and the requirement to investigate
the end-to-end recruitment process, including third-party

In light of the prior literature, the targeted audit process
could still have flaws. Firstly, the master list of employees,
from which we selected interviewees, may not have included
everyone. Additionally, there is of course no guarantee that
the workers were not coached on what to say. The research
is also limited in terms of its supply chain scope given that it
investigated modern slavery detection and remediation for
Buyer A and one of their tier-one suppliers. Further investigation could be conducted of product assembly that takes

PRODUCTION PLANNING & CONTROL

place outside the factory walls and beyond the immediate
first tier, such as homeworking – a context in which many
vulnerable workers are employed in the textile industry in
developing countries. The research could also be extended
to include other lower tier materials and component suppliers. Additionally, third-party recruitment agencies could be
involved in future studies. Such studies could potentially
uncover new issues and challenges or require a different
approach to the detection and remediation of modern slavery. This could also build on the literature that has considered how responsibility is delegated for managing
sustainability amongst sub-suppliers in complex multi-tier
supply chains (Wilhelm, Blome, Wieck, et al. 2016; Wilhelm,
Blome, Bhakoo, et al. 2016; Grimm et al. 2016).
Additionally, research could validate and further develop
the audit protocol presented. Future research could also continue to assess the remediation process by, for example,
investigating the effectiveness of the smartphone application
and modern slavery toolkit. For example, it will be important
to further investigate how issues of trust, power and control
impact their implementation. In particular, it is necessary to
understand the views of more of the stakeholders involved,
including the workers. Finally, as the audit and remediation
processes presented here are clearly not fool-proof and the
criminal perpetrators of modern slavery may become wise to
these approaches, there is an ongoing need to research
smarter methods of modern slavery detection and
remediation.

1151

Linda C. Hendry is a Professor of Operations
Management at Lancaster University Management
School, UK. Her research interests include: global
supply chain management, including sustainable
sourcing and supply chain responses to modern slavery legislation; manufacturing strategy, planning &
control for product customisation contexts; and process improvement approaches, such as Six Sigma.
Linda is Member of the European Operations
Management Association (and was formerly on the Board as a member
of the Finance Team). She has published extensively in a wide variety of
journals, including those that focus on Operations Management,
Production and Operational Research.

Mark Stevenson is a Professor of Operations
Management at Lancaster University Management
School, UK. His research interests include socially
sustainable supply chain management, supply chain
risk and resilience, supply chain flexibility, and production planning and control in high-variety contexts. Mark is a member of the European Operations
Management Association (EurOMA), and his work
has appeared in various operations management
journals, including the International Journal of Operations & Production
Management (IJOPM), Production & Operations Management (POM), the
Journal of Business Ethics, the International Journal of Production
Economics (IJPE), and the International Journal of Production
Research (IJPR).

ORCID
Amy V. Benstead
Linda C. Hendry
Mark Stevenson

http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5307-9598
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4186-4908
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1681-8942

Disclosure statement

References

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

Albino, V., R. M. Dangelico, and P. Pontrandolfo. 2012. “Do InterOrganizational Collaborations Enhance a Firm’s Environmental
Performance? A Study of the Largest US Companies.” Journal of
Cleaner Production 37: 304–315. doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.07.033.
Allain, J., A. Crane, G. LeBaron, and L. Behbahani. 2013. Forced Labour’s
Business Models & Supply Chains. York: Joseph Rowntree Foundation.
Anner, M. 2019. “Predatory Purchasing Practices in Global Apparel
Supply Chains and the Employment Relations Squeeze in the Indian
Garment Export Industry.” International Labour Review 158 (4):
705–727. doi:10.1111/ilr.12149.
Awaysheh, A., and R. D. Klassen. 2010. “The Impact of Supply Chain
Structure on the Use of Supplier Socially Responsible Practices.”
International Journal of Operations & Production Management 30 (12):
1246–1268. doi:10.1108/01443571011094253.
Banerjee, S. B. 2014. “A Critical Perspective on Corporate Social
Responsibility.” Critical Perspectives on International Business 10 (1/2):
84–95.
Barrientos, S. 2008. “Contract Labour: The ‘Achilles Heel’of Corporate
Codes in Commercial Value Chains.” Development and Change 39 (6):
977–990. doi:10.1111/j.1467-7660.2008.00524.x.
Barrientos, S., and S. Smith. 2007. “Do Workers Benefit from Ethical
Trade? Assessing Codes of Labour Practice in Global Production
Systems.” Third World Quarterly 28 (4): 713–729. doi:10.1080/
01436590701336580.
Barrientos, S., U. Kothari, and N. Phillips. 2013. “Dynamics of Unfree
Labour in the Contemporary Global Economy.” Journal of
Development Studies 49 (8): 1037–1041. doi:10.1080/00220388.2013.
780043.

Funding
This work was supported by the Economic and Social Research Council
(10.13039/501100000269ES/J500094/1).

Notes on contributors
Dr Amy V. Benstead is a Lecturer in Fashion
Management in the Department of Materials,
University of Manchester, UK. She holds a PhD in
Management Science from Lancaster University
Management School and is a member of the
European Operations Management Association
(EurOMA). Her research interests include socially sustainable supply chain management and global sourcing, with a particular focus on the textiles and
fashion industry. She has considerable knowledge and international
experience gained in the fashion industry, most recently as Senior
Merchandise Manager based in Istanbul, Turkey at global sourcing company Li & Fung where her main responsibilities included managing the
sourcing and production for major UK fashion retailers. Amy’s work has
been published in the International Journal of Operations & Production
Management (IJOPM).

1152

A. V. BENSTEAD ET AL.

Barrientos, S. W. 2013. “‘Labour Chains’: Analysing the Role of Labour
Contractors in Global Production Networks.” Journal of Development
Studies 49 (8): 1058–1071. doi:10.1080/00220388.2013.780040.
BBC. 2016. “Bed firm boss convicted over ‘slave workforce’.” Accessed
January 2016. Available at: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-englandleeds-35363259
BBC. 2019. “Sports Direct man jailed for modern slavery offences.”
Accessed November 2019. Available at: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/
uk-england-nottinghamshire-48531859
Benstead, A. V., L. C. Hendry, and M. Stevenson. 2018. “Horizontal
Collaboration in Response to Modern Slavery Legislation: An Action
Research Project.” International Journal of Operations & Production
Management 38 (12): 2286–2312. doi:10.1108/IJOPM-10-2017-0611.
Blome, C., D. Hollos, and A. Paulraj. 2014. “Green Procurement and
Green Supplier Development: Antecedents and Effects on Supplier
Performance.” International Journal of Production Research 52 (1):
32–49. doi:10.1080/00207543.2013.825748.
Cassell, C., and P. Johnson. 2006. “Action Research: Explaining the
Diversity.” Human Relations 59 (6): 783–814. doi:10.1177/
0018726706067080.
Chaudhry, L. N. 2009. “Forays into the Mist: Violences, Voices, Vignettes.”
In Voice in Qualitative Inquiry: Challenging Conventional, Interpretive
and Critical Conceptions in Qualitative Research, edited by
Alecia Youngblood Jackson and Lisa A. Mazzei, 137–164. London &
New York: Routledge.
Chen, J. Y., and S. A. Slotnick. 2015. “Supply Chain Disclosure and Ethical
Sourcing.” International Journal of Production Economics 161: 17–30.
doi:10.1016/j.ijpe.2014.11.001.
Christopher, M., R. Lowson, and H. Peck. 2004. “Creating Agile Supply
Chains in the Fashion Industry.” International Journal of Retail &
Distribution
Management
32
(8):
367–376.
doi:10.1108/
09590550410546188.
Coghlan, D., and T. Brannick. 2014. Doing Action Research in Your Own
Organization. London: Sage.
Cole, R., and J. Aitken. 2019. “Selecting Suppliers for Socially Sustainable
Supply Chain Management: Post-Exchange Supplier Development
Activities as Pre-Selection Requirements.” Production Planning &
Control 30 (14): 1184–1202.
Coughlan, P., and D. Coghlan. 2016. “Action Research.” In Research
Methods for Operations Management, edited by C. Karlsson, 233–267.
London: Routledge.
Crane, A. 2013. “Modern Slavery as a Management Practice: Exploring
the Conditions and Capabilities for Human Exploitation.” Academy of
Management Review 38 (1): 49–69. doi:10.5465/amr.2011.0145.
Crane, A., G. LeBaron, J. Allain, and L. Behbahani. 2019. “Governance
Gaps in Eradicating Forced Labor: From Global to Domestic Supply
Chains.” Regulation & Governance 13 (1): 86–106. doi:10.1111/rego.
12162.
Doorey, D. J. 2011. “The Transparent Supply Chain: From Resistance to
Implementation at Nike and Levi-Strauss.” Journal of Business Ethics
103 (4): 587–603. doi:10.1007/s10551-011-0882-1.
Drebes, M. J. 2016. “Including the ‘Other’: Power and Postcolonialism as
Underrepresented Perspectives in the Discourse on Corporate Social
Responsibility.” Critical Sociology 42 (1): 105–121. doi:10.1177/
0896920513509824.
Easterby-Smith, M., R. Thorpe, P. R. Jackson, and L. J. Jaspersen. 2018.
Management and Business Research. 6th ed. London: Sage.
Egels-Zanden, N. 2007. “Suppliers’ Compliance with MNCs’ Codes of
Conduct: Behind the Scenes at Chinese Toy Suppliers.” Journal of
Business Ethics 75 (1): 45–62. doi:10.1007/s10551-006-9237-8.
Egels-Zanden, N., K. Hulth
en, and G. Wulff. 2015. “Trade-Offs in Supply
Chain Transparency: The Case of Nudie Jeans Co.” Journal of Cleaner
Production 107: 95–104. doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.04.074.
Ellis, C. 1997. “What Counts as Scholarship in Communication? an
Autoethnographic Response.” Paper Presented at the Annual Meeting
of the National Communication Association (83rd, Chicago, IL,
November 19–23, 1997).
England, K. V. 1994. “Getting Personal: Reflexivity, Positionality, and
Feminist Research.” The Professional Geographer 46 (1): 80–89. doi:10.
1111/j.0033-0124.1994.00080.x.

ETI. 2017. “Base code guidance: Modern slavery.” Accessed August 2019.
https://www.ethical-trade.org/sites/default/files/shared_resources/eti_
base_code_guidance_modern_slavery_web.pdf.
Gereffi, G. 1999. “International Trade and Industrial Upgrading in the
Apparel Commodity Chain.” Journal of International Economics 48 (1):
37–70. doi:10.1016/S0022-1996(98)00075-0.
Gimenez, C., and E. M. Tachizawa. 2012. “Extending Sustainability to
Suppliers: A Systematic Literature Review.” Supply Chain Management:
An
International
Journal
17
(5):
531–543.
doi:10.1108/
13598541211258591.
Gold, S., A. Trautrims, and Z. Trodd. 2015. “Modern Slavery Challenges to
Supply Chain Management.” Supply Chain Management: An
International Journal 20 (5): 485–494. doi:10.1108/SCM-02-2015-0046.
Gould, D. 2005. “The Problem with Supplier Audits.” Corporate
Responsibility Management 2 (1): 24–29.
Grimm, J. H., J. S. Hofstetter, and J. Sarkis. 2016. “Exploring SubSuppliers’ Compliance with Corporate Sustainability Standards.”
Journal of Cleaner Production 112: 1971–1984. doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.
2014.11.036.
Gualandris, J., R. D. Klassen, S. Vachon, and M. Kalchschmidt. 2015.
“Sustainable Evaluation and Verification in Supply Chains: Aligning
and Leveraging Accountability to Stakeholders.” Journal of Operations
Management 38 (1): 1–13. doi:10.1016/j.jom.2015.06.002.
Guenin-Paracini, H., B. Malsch, and A. M. Paill
e. 2014. “Fear and Risk in
the Audit Process.” Accounting, Organizations and Society 39 (4):
264–288. doi:10.1016/j.aos.2014.02.001.
Helin, S., and M. Babri. 2015. “Travelling with a Code of Ethics: A
Contextual Study of a Swedish MNC Auditing a Chinese Supplier.”
Journal of Cleaner Production 107: 41–53. doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.08.
056.
Hughes, R. 1998. “Considering the Vignette Technique and Its
Application to a Study of Drug Injecting and HIV Risk and Safer
Behaviour.” Sociology of Health & Illness 20 (3): 381–400. doi:10.1111/
1467-9566.00107.
Huq, F. A., I. N. Chowdhury, and R. D. Klassen. 2016. “Social Management
Capabilities of Multinational Buying Firms and Their Emerging Market
Suppliers: An Exploratory Study of the Clothing Industry.” Journal of
Operations Management 46 (1): 19–37. doi:10.1016/j.jom.2016.07.005.
Huq, F., and M. Stevenson. 2020. “Implementing Socially Sustainable
Practices in Challenging Institutional Contexts: Building Theory from
Seven Supplier Cases.” Journal of Business Ethics 161 (2): 415–428. doi:
10.1007/s10551-018-3951-x.
Huq, F., M. Stevenson, and M. Zorzini. 2014. “Social Sustainability in
Developing Country Suppliers: An Exploratory Study in the Ready
Made Garments Industry of Bangladesh.” International Journal of
Operations & Production Management 34 (5): 610–638. doi:10.1108/
IJOPM-10-2012-0467.
ILO (International Labour Organisation). 2017. “ILO global estimate of
modern slavery.” Accessed November 2019. https://www.ilo.org/
wcmsp5/groups/public/@dgreports/@dcomm/docum-ents/publication/wcms_575479.pdf
ILO (International Labour Organisation). 2019. Accessed November 2019.
https://www.ilo.org/infostories/-enGB/Stories/Forced-Labour/
Deceptive-Recruitment-and-Coercion#what-is-forced-labour
Jiang, B. 2009. “Implementing Supplier Codes of Conduct in Global
Supply Chains: Process Explanations from Theoretic and Empirical
Perspectives.” Journal of Business Ethics 85 (1): 77–92. doi:10.1007/
s10551-008-9750-z.
Kozlowski, A., C. Searcy, and M. Bardecki. 2015. “Corporate Sustainability
Reporting in the Apparel Industry: An Analysis of Indicators
Disclosed.” International Journal of Productivity and Performance
Management 64 (3): 377–397. doi:10.1108/IJPPM-10-2014-0152.
LeBaron, G., and J. Lister. 2015. “Benchmarking Global Supply Chains:
The Power of the ‘Ethical Audit’ Regime.” Review of International
Studies 41 (5): 905–924. doi:10.1017/S0260210515000388.
LeBaron, G., J. Lister, and P. Dauvergne. 2017. “ Governing Global Supply
Chain Sustainability through the Ethical Audit Regime.” Globalizations
14 (6): 958–975. doi:10.1080/14747731.2017.1304008.

PRODUCTION PLANNING & CONTROL

Locke, R. M., F. Qin, and A. Brause. 2007. “Does Monitoring Improve
Labor Standards? Lessons from Nike.” ILR Review 61 (1): 3–31. doi:10.
1177/001979390706100101.
Lund-Thomsen, P., and A. Lindgreen. 2014. “Corporate Social
Responsibility in Global Value Chains: Where Are we Now and Where
Are we Going?” Journal of Business Ethics 123 (1): 11–22. doi:10.1007/
s10551-013-1796-x.
Macchion, L., A. Da Giau, F. Caniato, M. Caridi, P. Danese, R. Rinaldi, and
A. Vinelli. 2018. “Strategic Approaches to Sustainability in Fashion
Supply Chain Management.” Production Planning & Control 29 (1):
9–28. doi:10.1080/09537287.2017.1374485.
Marshall, D., L. McCarthy, P. McGrath, and F. Harrigan. 2016. “What’s
Your Strategy for Supply Chain Disclosure?” MIT Sloan Management
Review 57 (2): 37–45.
McCarthy, L. 2017. “Empowering Women through Corporate Social
Responsibility: A Feminist Foucauldian Critique.” Business Ethics
Quarterly 27 (4): 603–631. doi:10.1017/beq.2017.28.
McDonald, S., and S. Young. 2012. “Cross-Sector Collaboration Shaping
Corporate Social Responsibility Best Practice within the Mining
Industry.” Journal of Cleaner Production 37: 54–67. doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.06.007.
McKay, J., and P. Marshall. 2001. “The Dual Imperatives of Action
Research.” Information Technology & People 14 (1): 46–59. doi:10.1108/
09593840110384771.
Mol, A. P. 2015. “Transparency and Value Chain Sustainability.” Journal of
Cleaner Production 107: 154–161. doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.11.012.
Na€slund, D., R. Kale, and A. Paulraj. 2010. “Action Research in Supply
Chain Management – A Framework for Relevant and Rigorous
Research.” Journal of Business Logistics 31 (2): 331–355. doi:10.1002/j.
2158-1592.2010.tb00155.x.
New, S. J. 2015. “Modern Slavery and the Supply Chain: The Limits of
Corporate Social Responsibility?” Supply Chain Management: An
International Journal 20 (6): 697–707. doi:10.1108/SCM-06-2015-0201.
O’Rourke, D. 2003. “Outsourcing Regulation: Analyzing Nongovernmental
Systems of Labor Standards and Monitoring.” Policy Studies Journal 31
(1): 1–29. doi:10.1111/1541-0072.00001.
Outhwaite, O., and O. Martin-Ortega. 2019. “Worker-Driven
Monitoring–Redefining Supply Chain Monitoring to Improve Labour
Rights in Global Supply Chains.” Competition & Change 23 (4):
378–396.
€
Ozkazanç-Pan, B. 2008. “International Management Research Meets ‘the
Rest of the World’.” Academy of Management Review 33 (4): 964–974.
doi:10.5465/amr.2008.34422014.
Ozkazanc-Pan, B. 2019. “CSR as Gendered Neocoloniality in the Global
South.” Journal of Business Ethics 160 (4): 851–864. doi:10.1007/
s10551-018-3798-1.
Pagell, M., and A. Shevchenko. 2014. “Why Research in Sustainable
Supply Chain Management Should Have No Future.” Journal of Supply
Chain Management 50 (1): 44–55. doi:10.1111/jscm.12037.
Pagell, M., and Z. Wu. 2009. “Building a More Complete Theory of
Sustainable Supply Chain Management Using Case Studies of 10
Exemplars.” Journal of Supply Chain Management 45 (2): 37–56. doi:10.
1111/j.1745-493X.2009.03162.x.
Pedersen, Esben Rahbek, and Mette Andersen. 2006. “Safeguarding
Corporate Social Responsibility in Global Supply Chains: How Codes
of Conduct Are Managed in Buyer–Supplier Relationships.” Journal of
Public Affairs 6 (3–4): 228–240. doi:10.1002/pa.232.
Plambeck, E. L., and T. A. Taylor. 2016. “Supplier Evasion of a Buyer’s
Audit: Implications for Motivating Supplier Social and Environmental
Responsibility.” Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 18
(2): 184–197. doi:10.1287/msom.2015.0550.

1153

Power, M. K., and Y. Gendron. 2015. “Qualitative Research in Auditing: A
Methodological Roadmap.” Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory 34
(2): 147–165. doi:10.2308/ajpt-10423.
n, M., P. Lund-Thomsen, A. Chan, A. N. A. Muro, and C.
Prieto-Carro
Bhushan. 2006. “Critical Perspectives on CSR and Development: What
we Know, What we Don’t Know, and What we Need to Know.”
International Affairs 82 (5): 977–987. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2346.2006.
00581.x.
Sancha, C., C. Gimenez, V. Sierra, and A. Kazeminia. 2015. “Does
Implementing Social Supplier Development Practices Pay off?”, Supply
Chain Management.” Supply Chain Management: An International
Journal 20 (4): 389–403. doi:10.1108/SCM-07-2014-0239.
State of California Department of Justice. 2010. “The California transparency in supply chains act.” Accessed November 2019. Available at:
https://oag.ca.gov/SB657
Stevenson, M., and R. Cole. 2018. “Modern Slavery in Supply Chains: A
Secondary Data Analysis of Detection, Remediation and Disclosure.”
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal 23 (2): 81–99. doi:
10.1108/SCM-11-2017-0382.
Sultana, F. 2007. “Reflexivity, Positionality and Participatory Ethics:
Negotiating Fieldwork Dilemmas in International Research.” ACME: An
International E-Journal for Critical Geographies 6 (3): 374–385.
Tallontire, A., M. Opondo, V. Nelson, and A. Martin. 2011. “Beyond the
Vertical? Using Value Chains and Governance as a Framework to
Analyse Private Standards Initiatives in Agri-Food Chains.” Agriculture
and Human Values 28 (3): 427–441. doi:10.1007/s10460-009-9237-2.
The Guardian. 2017. “How big brands including sports direct unwittingly
used slave labour.” Accessed November 2019. Available at: www.theguardian.com/global-development/2017/aug/08/how-big-brandsincluding-sports-direct-unwittingly-used-slave-labour
Touboulic, A., and H. Walker. 2016. “A Relational, Transformative and
Engaged Approach to Sustainable Supply Chain Management: The
Potential of Action Research.” Human Relations 69 (2): 301–334. doi:
10.1177/0018726715583364.
UK Government. 2015. “Modern Slavery Act 2015.” Accessed November
2019. Available at http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2015/30/pdfs/
ukpga_20150030_en.pdf
Walk Free Foundation. 2018. “Global Slavery Index.” Accessed November
2019. Available at https://www.globalslaveryindex.org/
Wilhelm, M., C. Blome, E. Wieck, and C. Y. Xiao. 2016. “Implementing
Sustainability in Multi-Tier Supply Chains: Strategies and
Contingencies in Managing Sub-Suppliers.” International Journal of
Production Economics 182: 196–212. doi:10.1016/j.ijpe.2016.08.006.
Wilhelm, M. M., C. Blome, V. Bhakoo, and A. Paulraj. 2016. “Sustainability
in Multi-Tier Supply Chains: Understanding the Double Agency Role
of the First-Tier Supplier.” Journal of Operations Management 41 (1):
42–60. doi:10.1016/j.jom.2015.11.001.
Winter, S., and R. Lasch. 2016. “Environmental and Social Criteria in
Supplier Evaluation–Lessons from the Fashion and Apparel Industry.”
Journal of Cleaner Production 139: 175–190. doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.
07.201.
Zhang, M., K. S. Pawar, and S. Bhardwaj. 2017. “Improving Supply Chain
Social Responsibility through Supplier Development.” Production
Planning & Control 28 (6–8): 500–511. doi:10.1080/09537287.2017.
1309717.
Zorzini, M., L. C. Hendry, F. A. Huq, and M. Stevenson. 2015. “Socially
Responsible Sourcing: Reviewing the Literature and Its Use of
Theory.” International Journal of Operations & Production Management
35 (1): 60–109. doi:10.1108/IJOPM-07-2013-0355.

1154

A. V. BENSTEAD ET AL.

Appendix 1. Targeted audit protocol

Day 1: Audit preparation
Pre-assessment meeting
Location: Hotel

AM

Attendees Buyer A: BA1, BA2, BA7, NGO A: NGOA1, Supplier: S1, S2, S3
 Overview given of audit process/ schedule- focus on end-to-end recruitment process, employment cycle and robustness of Supplier system.
 Presented as learning experience for both parties.
 Information about legislation kept brief.
 Advised audit would include identification of areas to mitigate risk.
 Advised audit would help to form Buyer A policies.
 NGO A clarified some details provided in pre-audit assessment form – brief discussion of recruitment process.
 Master list of employees and attendance list requested for next day.
 Buyer A and NGOA asked Supplier if they had any concerns.
Buyer A preparation meeting
Location: Hotel
Attendees: Buyer A: BA1-7, NGO A: NGOA1
 Overview given of audit process/ schedule.
 Assigned roles/ tasks.
 Explanation provided of some of the local legislation concerning migrant workers.
 Overview given of key details from Pre- assessment meeting with Supplier.
 Informed of key risks to investigate.
 Advised to look for discrepancies during audit.

PM

Day 2: Audit assessment
Opening meeting
Location: Supplier

AM

Attendees: Buyer A: BA1-7, NGO A: NGOA1-6, Supplier: S1-S6, Buyer B: BB1
 Introduced audit team.
 Brief overview of schedule provided.
Supplier tour
Location: Supplier

AM

Attendees: Buyer A: All (except BA2 & BA6), NGOA: NGOA2-6, Supplier: S1, S2, Buyer B: BB1
Selection of workers for interviews/Document review
Location: Supplier
AM
Attendees: Buyer A: BA2, BA6, NGO A: NGOA1
The migrant workers employed at Supplier were recruited and hired through two main channels
1. “Walk In” – Local, direct hiring of migrant workers already in the host country. These migrant workers already have a valid passport; visa and work permit
on hand and can apply for a job by directly walking through the factory door.
2. Recruited from overseas – These migrant workers have never been to the host country to work before. They need to go through recruitment agents in
their home country to apply for a job at the factory.
20 workers selected from master list and attendance list
Selection criteria:
 10 x Recruited from overseas
 10 x Walk In
 Position
 Start Date
NB 3 additional workers selected and interviewed during audit
Comments: Audit findings highlighted that Date of Birth (DOB) could be a useful addition to selection criteria
Three parallel sessions
Location: Supplier
Management Interviews/
Documents Review
Audit Team Attendees:
Buyer A: BA1-4, BA7
NGO A: NGOA2
Buyer B: BB1
NB BA1 moved between sessions
Supplier Attendees:
S2-S5

All day
Documents Review (Plus Interview with 1 x Supplier
Translator S6)
Audit Team Attendees:
Buyer A: BA1, BA6
NGO A: NGOA1, NGOA3
NB BA1 moved between sessions
Supplier Attendees:
S6

Worker Interviews
Audit Team Attendees:
Buyer A: BA1, BA5,BA6
NGO A: NGO4-6
NB BA1 moved between sessions
NB BA6 moved to worker interviews after documents review
Supplier Attendees: (Selected Workers)
S7-22

PRODUCTION PLANNING & CONTROL

Management interviews/Documents review
Referred to NGO A ‘Management Interview Guide’ document for guidance
Stage 1 Management Interviews (Group discussion)
Key points covered:
 How Supplier recruits.
 Clarification of number of workers and Recruited from overseas/Walk In split.
 Recruited from overseas process.
 Documents sent to local government.
 Labour agency process and agreement.
 Visits to labour agency conducted.
 Recruitment and advertising.
 How Supplier specifies number/ type of workers required.
 Selection process.
 Fees (breakdown and who pays).
 Pay and terms.
 Contracts of Employment.
 Accommodation.
 Work Permits.
 Visas.
 Termination of Employment.
 Renewal of Employment.
 Transport from worker’s home country.
 Worker’s bank accounts.
Stage 2 Documents Review (Group discussion)
 Worker Files – 10  Recruited from overseas, 10 x Walk In
 Checked if anything is missing.
 Application Form.
 Work Permit- checked date is valid.
 Visa- checked date is valid.
 Passport- checked date is valid and DOB.
 Checked all dates correlate.
 Induction documentation.
 Checked contract in two languages.
 Checked probation period.
 Checked if contract is detailed and provides all the required information
 Agency Licence (employees also need to be registered)
 Recruited from Overseas – Home Country Government Agreement (includes supplier and labour agency details) (Requested- given on Day 2)
 Employee bank books (Supplier in procession)
 Labour Agency contract
Documents review
 Working hours and overtime.
 Annual Leave/ Holiday Request records.
 Wages.
 Policies – recruitment and migrant workers.
 Grievance Procedure.
Comments: Interview with Supplier Translator also took place
Worker interviews
Referred to NGO A Tool 4 ‘Conducting Interviews with Migrant Workers’ for guidance
Main Topics covered:
 Recruitment and Hiring.
 Recruitment Fees and Expenses.
 Contracts of Employment.
 Document retention.
 Deposits.
 Wages and Wage Reductions.
 Compulsory or involuntary overtime.
 Freedom of movement and personal freedom.
 Workplace discipline.
 Threat of violence and intimidation.
 Worker Communication and Grievance Procedure.
 Termination of Employment.
(continued)

1155

1156

A. V. BENSTEAD ET AL.

Key points covered during interviews:
 Date of Birth (DOB).
 Start date.
 Family background.
 Literacy.
 Passport, visa and work permit arrangements.
 Home leave.
 Bank books – possession and access.
 Payment process.
 Orientation/ induction.
 Contracts- how many, when signed and where etc.
 Contract renewal.
 Transportation from home country.
 Medical test.
 Methods for sending money from country of employment to home country.
 Accommodation.
 Training.
 When the worker learnt to sew.
 Injuries.
 Personal Protective Equipment (PPE).
 Pregnancy and maternity leave.
 Workers asked if they had any questions.
Documents Review
 Passport, visa and work permit checked during interview.
 Worker’s file and holiday requests checked after interview.
Morning de-brief
Location: Supplier

PM

Attendees: Buyer A: BA1-7, NGO A: NGOA1-6
Discussion to highlight any issues requiring follow up during afternoon sessions:
 Anomalies identified.
 Risks/ Red flags identified.
 Documented any concerns.
 Key leads from management interviews identified.
 Key leads from worker interviews identified.
Wrap up with supplier
Location: Supplier

PM

Attendees: Buyer A: BA1-7, NGO A: NGOA1-6, Buyer B: BB1
 Thanked for cooperation.
 Agenda for the following day provided.
Audit team de-brief
Location: Hotel
Attendees: Buyer A: BA1-7, NGO A: NGOA1-6
 Overview of day – recruitment, selection and hiring, any gaps in policies and procedures- each area discussed in turn.
 Cross-referenced findings.
 Red flags/key issues to follow up identified.

PM

PRODUCTION PLANNING & CONTROL

1157

Day 3: Audit assessment
Two parallel sessions
Location: Supplier
Management Interviews/Document Review
Audit Team Attendees
Buyer A: BA1, BA2, BA4, BA5
NGO A: NGOA1-2
Buyer B: BB1
NB BA1 moved between sessions
Supplier Attendees: S2-5

AM
Worker Interviews
Audit Team Attendees
Buyer A: BA1, BA3, BA6, BA7
NGO A: NGOA3-6
NB BA1 moved between sessions
Supplier Attendees: (Selected Workers)
S23-30

Management interviews
 As per Day 1 and based upon feedback/discussion from previous day’s internal de brief
Worker Interviews
 As per Day 1 and based upon feedback/discussion from previous day’s internal de brief
Post audit assessment meeting/Closing meeting preparation
Location: Hotel

PM

Attendees: Buyer A: BA1-7, NGO A: NGOA1-6
 Brief overview of modern slavery provided.
 Audit triangulation- is there enough evidence to call a non-compliance or is it just a risk as issue could not be validated?
 Consolidation of findings – key risks and findings from management interviews, document reviews and worker interviews.
 Agreed on findings to be communicated to Supplier in closing meeting and split into themes to present in PowerPoint presentation.
 Areas of good practice identified.
 Gaps in policies/ processes identified.
 Key learning points from team discussed.

Day 4: Closing meeting
Closing meeting
Location: Supplier

AM

Attendees: Buyer A: BA1, BA2, BA4, BA7, NGO A: NGOA1-2, Supplier: S1-5, Buyer B: BB1
 Brief overview of modern slavery legislation, due diligence and audit triangulation provided.
 Areas of good practice highlighted.
 Areas of concern/ risks/ findings (separated by theme) provided.
 Going forward- next steps / priorities discussed.

Day 4: Final reflections meeting
Buyer A reflections meeting
Location: Hotel
Attendees: Buyer A Audit Team
 Reflected on audit process in group discussion.

AM

