Neural Networks 194 (2026) 108114

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Neural Networks
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/neunet

Full Length Article

A domain-speciﬁc cross-lingual semantic alignment learning model for
low-resource languages
Yurong Wang a,b,c , Min Lin a,b,c,d,∗, Qitu Hu a,b,c , Shuangcheng Bai b,c,e , Yanling Li e , Longjie Bao f
a

College of Mathematics Science, Inner Mongolia Normal University, Hohhot, 010022, Inner Mongolia, China

b Center for Applied Mathematics Inner Mongolia, Hohhot, 010022, Inner Mongolia, China
c

Key Laboratory of Inﬁnite-dimensional Hamiltonian Systems and Algorithmic Applications of the Ministry of Education, Hohhot, 010022, Inner Mongolia, China

d Inner Mongolia Electronic Information Vocational and Technical College, Hohhot, 010070, Inner Mongolia, China
e
f

College of Computer Science and Technology, Inner Mongolia Normal University, Hohhot, 010022, Inner Mongolia, China
Inner Mongolia International Mongolian Medical Hospital, Hohhot, 010020, Inner Mongolia, China

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Keywords:
Low-resource languages
Domain-speciﬁc
Cross-lingual multi-granularity semantic
alignment
Cross-lingual mapping
Cross-lingual knowledge distillation

a b s t r a c t
Cross-lingual semantic alignment models facilitate the sharing and utilization of multilingual domain-speciﬁc
data (e.g., medical, legal), oﬀering cost-eﬀective solutions for improving low-resource language tasks. However,
existing methods are challenged by parallel data scarcity, semantic space heterogeneity, morphological complexity, and weak robustness-particularly for agglutinative languages. Therefore, this paper proposes CLWKD,
a cross-lingual mapping and knowledge distillation framework. CLWKD leverages domain-speciﬁc pretrained
models from high-resource languages as teachers and integrates multi-granularity alignment matrices with limited parallel data to guide cross-lingual knowledge transfer. CLWKD jointly learns multi-granularity semantic
alignment mapping matrices at the token, word, and sentence levels from general-domain data. It eases domain
data scarcity and helps bridge structural gaps caused by morphological and syntactic diﬀerences. To alleviate
data sparsity and out-of-vocabulary issues in agglutinative languages, multilingual embedding sharing and morphological segmentation strategies are introduced. To improve the stability of unsupervised mapping training,
generator pretraining is introduced and further combined with high-conﬁdence word and sentence pairs to optimize the mapping matrix.To preserve alignment with fewer parameters, a parameter recycling and embedding
bottleneck design is adopted. Experiments across the medical, legal, and educational domains on MongolianChinese and Korean-Chinese language pairs demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of CLWKD in three cross-lingual tasks.

1. Introduction
In recent years, pretrained language models (PLMs) have achieved
remarkable progress in open-domain tasks for high-resource languages.
However, owing to the severe scarcity of both general-domain and
domain-speciﬁc corpora, low-resource languages still exhibit limited capability in domain-speciﬁc text mining, such as in the medical and legal
ﬁelds. Cross-lingual semantic alignment models facilitate the sharing
and utilization of domain data across multiple languages, providing an
eﬀective and low-cost approach to improve the performance of deep
learning models for low-resource languages in speciﬁc domains. Therefore, exploring cross-lingual semantic alignment models tailored for
low-resource languages has become increasingly important in domainspeciﬁc scenarios.
Current mainstream approaches to cross-lingual semantic alignment
can be broadly categorized into three types: cross-lingual ﬁne-tuning,

cross-lingual mapping, and cross-lingual knowledge distillation. These
methods enhance the semantic alignment capability of multilingual
models at the sentence level, word level, and intermodel level.
Cross-lingual ﬁne-tuning methods aim to align sentence-level semantics by optimizing the [CLS] representation in multilingual PLMs.
To further improve sentence alignment, researchers have introduced
auxiliary token-level alignment tasks during training (Hu et al., 2020;
Li et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023), and some studies leverage word
alignment supervision to increase sentence-level performance (Artetxe
et al., 2017b; Chousa et al., 2020; Lample et al., 2017; Lian et al., 2020;
Miao et al., 2024; Schwenk et al., 2019). Recently, Zhu et al. (2024)
argued that hard token-to-token alignment may disrupt sentence-level
structure and thus proposed the use of alignment matrices to preserve
contextual dependencies, coupled with a self-distillation mechanism to
improve model robustness. To further improve multilingual embedding
alignment for low-resource languages, Ai and Huang (2024) proposed

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: 15049138357@163.com (Y. Wang), linmin@imnu.edu.cn (M. Lin), huqitu@gmail.com (Q. Hu), bsc@onon.cn (S. Bai),
liyanling7871397@163.com (Y. Li), 1016486749@qq.com (L. Bao).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2025.108114
Received 8 November 2024; Received in revised form 29 July 2025; Accepted 11 September 2025
Available online 16 September 2025
0893-6080/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

Neural Networks 194 (2026) 108114

Y. Wang et al.

initializing embeddings into similar geometrical structures across languages before training by modeling word frequency ranks from monolingual vocabularies. Pham et al. (2024) introduced an embedding initialization method that jointly leverages lexical and semantic alignment,
along with a systematic search for the optimal vocabulary size. Li and
Li (2024) proposed an angular optimization mechanism to preserve the
structural relationships among sentence embeddings.
Cross-lingual mapping methods focus on word-level semantic
alignment by learning a mapping matrix between word embeddings to
project diﬀerent languages into a shared representation space. This strategy is particularly well suited for low-resource languages (Artetxe et al.,
2018; Mikolov et al., 2013; Ruder et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019). The
approach was ﬁrst introduced by Mikolov et al. (2013), and subsequent
studies have incorporated adversarial training mechanisms to iteratively
optimize the mapping matrix between a generator and a discriminator via parallel or contrastive corpora (Bai et al., 2019; Conneau et al.,
2017; Liang et al., 2023; Tao et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2017). Although
such methods support weakly supervised or even unsupervised learning, the adversarial mechanism is often sensitive to initialization and
prone to instability during training, especially with respect to agglutinative languages with complex morphological structures. Recently, Hu
and Xu (2024) proposed aligning multiple subspaces to alleviate structural inconsistency in the embedding space, exhibited in improvements
in medium-resource languages. This method struggles to address semantic misalignment caused by syntactic and morphological variations.
Cross-lingual knowledge distillation methods transfer semantic
knowledge from high-resource languages to low-resource models via a
teacher-student architecture. Typically, a high-resource PLM serves as
the teacher to guide the student model in learning task-speciﬁc semantics and achieving cross-lingual representation alignment (Ding et al.,
2022; Reimers & Gurevych, 2020; Wang et al., 2023). Unlike the previous two methods, knowledge distillation requires no large-scale labeled
data in the target language and oﬀers high transfer eﬃciency. It also enables the direct use of high-resource language representations in vertical domains to improve task performance for low-resource languages. In
addition, the distillation mechanism naturally supports model compression, making it more suitable for deployment. Despite its theoretical advantages, the practical eﬀectiveness of cross-lingual knowledge distillation remains constrained by two major challenges. First, the distillation
process relies on high-quality domain-speciﬁc parallel corpora, which
are extremely scarce for low-resource languages in specialized ﬁelds
such as medicine and law. Second, the signiﬁcant structural diﬀerences
between the semantic spaces of the source and target languages often
lead to unstable knowledge transfer. To alleviate the problem of semantic space heterogeneity, prior studies have explored techniques such as
prototype modeling, similarity-based constraints, and contrastive learning (Ge et al., 2023; Park et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2023). For example,
the IMASCL (Park et al., 2024) method addresses semantic space divergence by employing a soft contrastive learning strategy. Speciﬁcally,
this method distills the similarity structure derived from a monolingual
teacher model to guide the student model in aligning semantic representations across multiple languages. These methods perform well when applied to languages with similar syntactic and part-of-speech structures.
Their alignment eﬀectiveness remains limited when dealing with agglutinative languages that exhibit rich morphological variations and complex structures.
These challenges are particularly pronounced in China’s multi-ethnic
linguistic context. With the deepening of cultural integration, traditional
Chinese medicine has evolved into a comprehensive system that includes Tibetan, Miao, Mongolian, and other ethnic medical traditions.
Similarly, domains such as law and education also widely adopt minority languages. However, many of these languages—such as Mongolian,
Tibetan, Kazakh, and Uyghur—suﬀer from severe data scarcity, strong
agglutinative morphology, and ﬂexible word order, which further complicate semantic modeling and cross-lingual knowledge transfer.

In summary, current cross-lingual semantic alignment for domainspeciﬁc tasks in low-resource agglutinative languages faces three core
challenges: 1) Insuﬃcient data coverage: The insuﬃcient corpus coverage of low-resource languages (e.g., Mongolian) in multilingual pretraining, coupled with the scarcity of large-scale domain-parallel data,
signiﬁcantly hinders cross-lingual semantic alignment and domain
knowledge transfer. 2) Semantic space heterogeneity: Signiﬁcant differences in syntactic structures and lexical morphology between source
and target languages lead to inconsistencies in semantic representation
spaces, increasing the diﬃculty of alignment. 3) Strong agglutinative
morphology: Agglutinative languages such as Mongolian exhibit complex word formation and rich inﬂection, which further exacerbates data
sparsity and the out-of-vocabulary (OOV) problem.
Therefore, the objective of this study is to develop a cross-lingual
semantic alignment model tailored for low-resource languages that
can eﬀectively address three key issues-domain-speciﬁc data scarcity,
semantic space heterogeneity, and data sparsity caused by complex
morphology-while ensuring model robustness.
To this end, we proposes CLWKD, a cross-lingual mapping and
knowledge distillation framework for multilevel semantic alignment in
low-resource scenarios. The overall model architecture of CLWKD is illustrated in Fig. 1. Compared with existing approaches, CLWKD not only
introduces a multi-granularity collaborative strategy for semantic alignment, but also, for the ﬁrst time, combines a general-domain mapping
matrix with domain-speciﬁc knowledge distillation to address modeling
challenges in extremely low-resource language settings. The key components are as follows:
First, to alleviate the problem of domain-speciﬁc data scarcity, we
introduce a domain-speciﬁc pretrained model from a high-resource language as the teacher network. Using a general-domain mapping matrix
and a small amount of domain parallel data as a bridge, we eﬀectively
transfer and align domain knowledge to a multilingual PLM. Unlike
existing approaches, CLWKD reduces reliance on large-scale domainspeciﬁc data by leveraging a general-domain mapping matrix. It adaptively incorporates contextual representations through the mapping matrix to preserve lexical and syntactic structures from the general domain,
thereby enhancing modeling capacity in low-resource scenarios. Compared with models such as IMASCL (Park et al., 2024), which focus on
aligning the similarity structure distilled from teacher models, CLWKD
places greater emphasis on maintaining multi-granularity consistency
across lexical, syntactic, and semantic levels within the mapping space.
Moreover, CLWKD further integrates domain knowledge distillation to
achieve coordinated alignment of structural and semantic representations.
Second, to address the problem of semantic space heterogeneity,
we jointly learn multi-granularity semantic alignment mapping matrices at the token, word, and sentence levels via general-domain parallel corpora. This design mitigates the substantial morphological and
syntactic diﬀerences between the source and target languages. In contrast to prior methods based on single-granularity mappings (either at
the word or sentence level), our approach employs a multi-granularity
alignment strategy to leverage complementary information. Speciﬁcally,
sentence-level alignment is guided by word-level supervision signals,
and word-level alignment is supported by sentence-level contextual representations. We argue that in low-resource languages, word-level and
sentence-level alignment are not isolated tasks but rather mutually reinforcing and coevolving processes. Relying solely on either layer may
lead to semantic drift or grammatical inconsistency, especially for language pairs with signiﬁcant structural divergence. Therefore, joint modeling across granularities oﬀers a more robust and eﬃcient solution.
Compared with methods such as DM-BLI (Hu & Xu, 2024), which rely
on bilingual dictionaries and are less sensitive to contextual information, CLWKD demonstrates stronger robustness in semantic alignment,
particularly for structurally divergent and extremely low-resource language pairs.
2

Neural Networks 194 (2026) 108114

Y. Wang et al.

Fig. 1. The CLWKD framework consists of two stages. In the ﬁrst stage: 1
⃝ A morphological decomposition strategy is introduced to split words in the target language
(e.g., Mongolian) into stems and aﬃxes. This alleviates the issues of morphological complexity and OOV words, and constructs multi-granularity representations at
the token, word, and sentence levels; 2
⃝ A GAN structure is employed. The generator is pretrained to project source language embeddings into the semantic space
of the target language across diﬀerent granularities. The discriminator determines whether the projected embeddings resemble real target language representations,
thereby guiding the generator to learn eﬀective cross-lingual semantic mappings; 3
⃝ High-conﬁdence word and sentence pairs are then leveraged to further optimize
the mapping matrix under unsupervised or weakly supervised settings. In the second stage, a domain-speciﬁc PLM is used as the teacher model. With the multigranularity mapping matrix learned in the ﬁrst stage and a small amount of domain parallel data, knowledge distillation is performed to transfer and align domain
knowledge from the high-resource language to the low-resource language model.

Third, to address the limited corpus coverage of low-resource languages (e.g., Mongolian) in multilingual pretraining, as well as the data
sparsity and OOV issues caused by their complex agglutinative morphology, CLWKD proposes leveraging a shared multilingual PLM embedding layer combined with morphological decomposition strategies
to enhance modeling eﬀectiveness and cross-lingual alignment capability. Unlike existing approaches that rely on monolingual word frequency
modeling (Ai & Huang, 2024) or optimize vocabularies through lexical

alignment (Pham et al., 2024) for cross-lingual space alignment, CLWKD
enables Mongolian embeddings to directly beneﬁt from the representation spaces of high-resource languages such as Chinese and English
during the initialization stage, and further reﬁnes subword-level modeling through morphological segmentation to alleviate data sparsity issues. Notably, in real-world Mongolian domain corpora (e.g., medical
texts), the frequent code-switching between Chinese and English provides a natural context for cross-lingual representation sharing, further
3

Neural Networks 194 (2026) 108114

Y. Wang et al.

promoting semantic interaction and enhancing the model’s eﬀectiveness
in practical tasks.
Finally, with respect to mapping matrix training, CLWKD ﬁrst employs an adversarial network to generate an initial alignment structure, after which, it then iteratively improves the mapping performance
through gradient-based optimization, guided by high-conﬁdence word
and sentence pairs. To mitigate instability and initialization sensitivity
commonly observed in adversarial training, we introduce a generator
pretraining mechanism, which enhances both the stability of the mapping matrix and its cross-lingual adaptability. For model compression,
we adopt a combination of parameter recycling and an embedding bottleneck strategy to retain the semantic alignment capacity while reducing model size.
We conduct a systematic evaluation of CLWKD on two language pairs
across three domains—medical, legal, and educational—covering three
cross-lingual tasks. The results demonstrate that CLWKD has signiﬁcant
advantages in domain-speciﬁc word and sentence alignment tasks for
low-resource agglutinative languages.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
We propose a uniﬁed framework, CLWKD, which integrates crosslingual mapping and knowledge distillation. It is designed to address key challenges in domain-speciﬁc semantic alignment for lowresource languages-namely, the scarcity of domain parallel data, semantic space heterogeneity, and data sparsity caused by complex morphology. CLWKD eﬀectively enhances word- and sentence-level semantic
alignment across languages.
We design a context-aware alignment strategy based on generaldomain corpora, which leverages a generative adversarial network
(GAN) framework to jointly learn token-, word-, and sentence-level
cross-lingual semantic mapping matrices. This is achieved through multiple techniques, including generator pretraining, gradient-based mapping optimization, shared multilingual PLM embeddings, and morphological decomposition.
We leverage multi-granularity mapping matrices and a small amount
of domain-speciﬁc data as a bridge for cross-lingual knowledge distillation, enabling the transfer of high-resource domain knowledge to multilingual models for semantic alignment. During model compression, we
employ parameter recycling and embedding bottleneck strategies to preserve alignment capacity.
In
experiments
conducted
on
two
language
pairs—
Mongolian–Chinese and Korean–Chinese—across three cross-lingual
tasks (word alignment, bitext retrieval, and entity recognition) and
multiple domains (medical, legal, and educational), the results show
that CLWKD signiﬁcantly outperforms existing methods. Moreover, the
compressed variant, CLWKD_S, also achieves strong performance and
competitive eﬀectiveness.

PLMs for the medical ﬁeld. Lee et al. (2020) proposed BioBERT, a pretrained model that is similar in structure to BERT and is further trained
on biomedical abstracts from PubMed and full-text articles from PMC.
Symeonidou (Symeonidou et al., 2019) introduced a transfer learning
model for named entity recognition (NER) that is based on BioBERTBiLSTM-CRF, which demonstrated improved performance over previous NER models across three medical datasets. Rasmy et al. (2021) developed Med-BERT, a pre-trained model trained from scratch using abstracts from PubMed and full text from PMC, which signiﬁcantly boosts
performance in small sample tasks. Yang (2021) proposed MedBERT, a
model designed for Chinese clinical natural language processing tasks.
Subsequently, other researchers further ﬁne-tuned and improved MedBERT (Gan et al., 2021). Zhang et al. (2020) from Alibaba introduced
MC-BERT, a pre-trained model for Chinese medical texts that is built on
BERT and trained with Chinese medical data. ERNIE-Health, which is
based on Baidu’s ERNIE model, learns the relationships between symptoms and treatment plans through medical entity masking and questionanswer matching tasks and outperformed BERT on the CCKS2019 medical entity recognition and question-answer matching tasks.
To improve semantic understanding and task performance in the
legal domain, researchers have developed several Chinese legal pretrained language models, among which Lawformer (Xiao et al., 2021)
and LegalRoBERTa1 are representative. The Lawformer is based on the
Longformer architecture with sparse attention, enabling eﬃcient processing of lengthy legal documents. Pretrained on large-scale real-world
legal texts, it has been applied to tasks such as legal classiﬁcation, statute
matching, and question answering. LegalRoBERTa is a RoBERTa-based
model further pretrained on Chinese legal corpora, retaining general
language understanding while adapting to legal-speciﬁc tasks such as
document classiﬁcation and legal entity recognition.
In the education domain, TAL-EduBERT2 and EduBERT (Clavié &
Gal, 2019) are two notable Chinese pretrained models. TAL-EduBERT,
developed by the TAL Education Group, is pretrained on large-scale
educational data, including textbooks, teaching materials, and student
answers. EduBERT, built on BERT, is further pretrained on educationrelated corpora and is used in tasks such as academic writing analysis
and educational resource recommendation.
2.2. Cross-lingual ﬁne-tuning and mapping semantic alignment
Currently, cross-lingual ﬁne-tuning semantic alignment methods
based on multilingual PLMs are primarily used for learning sentencelevel semantic alignment, while cross-lingual mapping methods are
mainly applied to word-level semantic alignment. The following section
provides a detailed explanation.
Cross-lingual ﬁne-tuning for sentence-level semantic alignment
methods. InfoXLM (Sun et al., 2019) extends the XLM-R model, which
is pre-trained on a large corpus of parallel data through masked language modeling and translation language modeling. XLM-Align (Chi
et al., 2021), which also uses many parallel sentences, ﬁrst performs
self-supervised word alignment on these sentences and then trains by
masked language modeling. Recently, the importance of token-level
auxiliary tasks has been recognized. Zhang et al. (2023) achieved signiﬁcant results on the XTREME benchmark (Hu et al., 2020) by using
synonym-based token alignment. Li et al. (2023) improved sentencelevel semantic alignment models on multilingual PLMs through token
alignment tasks. Owing to the scarcity of parallel corpora, research
on cross-lingual sentence embeddings for low-resource languages has
lagged. To address this, researchers have proposed enhancing crosslingual sentence embeddings for low-resource languages by utilizing
word alignment tasks on top of multilingual PLMs (Miao et al., 2024).
The basic idea of unsupervised sentence alignment is to further achieve

2. Related work
2.1. Pre-trained language models
Multilingual pre-trained models. To address the performance issues of PLMs for low-resource languages, researchers have proposed
multilingual PLMs (Conneau, 2019; Liu, 2020; Shliazhko et al., 2022;
Xue, 2020), which provide the possibility for learning representations
of multiple languages jointly. Multilingual bidirectional encoder representations from transformers (mBERT) (Kenton & Toutanova, 2019) was
pre-trained on Wikipedia data in 104 languages and achieved signiﬁcant
performance in downstream tasks. XLM (Conneau & Lample, 2019) introduced the translation language modeling objective, leveraging parallel data to enhance cross-lingual transferability. XLM-R (Conneau, 2019)
continued training on RoBERTa (Liu, 2019) via parallel corpora.
Domain-speciﬁc pre-trained language models. Owing to the
abundance of specialized medical terminology in medical texts, general PLMs often perform poorly in extracting information from medical content. In recent years, researchers have developed domain-speciﬁc

1

https://data.thunlp.org/legal/LegalRoBERTa.zip

2 https://github.com/tal-tech/edu-bert

4

Neural Networks 194 (2026) 108114

Y. Wang et al.

sentence-level alignment on the basis of prealigned word embeddings
(Artetxe et al., 2017b; Lample et al., 2017). Schwenk et al. (2019)
mapped word embeddings from diﬀerent languages to a uniﬁed vector space to obtain bilingual sentence pairs. Lian et al. (2020) proposed
a similarity calculation method that maps monolingual corpora from
each language to a low-dimensional semantic space via autoencoders.
Then, the diﬀerence between each language’s distribution in this semantic space and a central distribution is measured via the Wasserstein
distance, and this distance is minimized to establish alignment relationships with the central distribution. Chousa et al. (2020) determined the
optimal sentence alignment by predicting the similarity between segments in source and target language sentences.
Cross-lingual mapping for word-level semantic alignment methods.
Mikolov et al. (2013) trained word vectors for two languages separately
and then learned a linear mapping matrix between vector spaces from
a small bilingual dictionary. Building on this, Xing et al. (2015) proposed normalizing word vectors so that their inner product and cosine
distance are equal. Artetxe et al. (2017a) used self-learning methods
to iteratively optimize the mapping matrix. With the development of
pre-trained model techniques, dynamic word embedding models have
emerged (Kenton & Toutanova, 2019; Liu et al., 2024). Wang et al.
(2019) learned cross-lingual mapping matrices for dynamic word embeddings from parallel sentences and demonstrated that their performance exceeds that of static word embedding mapping matrices. Li
et al. (2022) proposed a two-stage contrastive learning framework. In
the ﬁrst stage, contrastive learning is used to reﬁne cross-lingual linear mappings between static word embeddings; in the second stage,
contrastive ﬁne-tuning of multilingual BERT enhances word-level translation capabilities. Compared with supervised learning methods, unsupervised and weakly supervised mehods are more suitable for scenarios
where aligned data are scarce in low-resource languages. Zhang et al.
(2017) introduced GANs and used adversarial training to match distributions for bilingual word alignment. Conneau et al. (2017) generated
high-quality aligned dictionaries after GAN training to optimize transformation matrices and proposed the cross-domain similarity local scaling (CSLS) metric to address the hubness problem in high-dimensional
spaces by calculating the similarity between cross-lingual vocabularies.
Bai et al. (2019) learned a shared semantic space for the source and target languages and used this space for unsupervised bilingual dictionary
extraction. Tao et al. (2023)proposed an unsupervised word alignment
method based on evolutionary algorithms and bidirectional recurrent
GANs to address the instability of GAN training. Liang et al. (2023)
developed a framework for constructing multilingual embeddings for
domain transfer learning by extracting pivot words from current data
and incorporating them as weight factors into embedding alignment.
Recently, Recently, Hu and Xu (2024) further proposed a multisubspace alignment strategy to enhance the robustness of embedding
alignment.
In contrast to these approaches, this paper combines multiple strategies to jointly ﬁne-tune and learn multi-granularity cross-lingual semantic mapping matrices for token, word, and sentence embeddings between Mongolian and Chinese. It fully leverages the interdependencies
between word alignment and sentence alignment tasks while eﬀectively

addressing challenges related to syntactic structure and morphological
diﬀerences.
2.3. Cross-lingual knowledge distillation for knowledge transfer and
semantic alignment
As mentioned earlier, knowledge distillation has three major advantages: model compression, knowledge transfer, and semantic alignment.
In the context of model compression, BERT-PKD (Sun et al., 2019) extracts knowledge from both the ﬁnal layer and intermediate layers of the
model during ﬁne-tuning. DistilBERT (Sanh, 2019) performs distillation
during pre-training, halving the number of hidden layers in BERT. TinyBERT (Jiao et al., 2019) extracts knowledge from BERT during both pretraining and ﬁne-tuning. Mobile-BERT (Sun et al., 2020) reﬁnes BERT
into a model with smaller dimensions for each layer. Additionally, Wang
et al. (2020) conducted deep self-attention distillation of BERT.
In the areas of cross-lingual knowledge transfer and vector space
alignment, researchers have recently made signiﬁcant progress. Reimers
and Gurevych (2020) proposed a multilingual knowledge distillation
method that transfers source language vector spaces to various target language spaces through parallel corpora, achieving vector space
alignment. To obtain compact models with cross-lingual matching capabilities, Ding et al. (2022) proposed a multistage distillation framework that combines contrastive learning, bottleneck, and parameter cycling strategies to align multilingual vector spaces while transferring
knowledge from large models to smaller models. Wang et al. (2023)
used cross-lingual knowledge distillation to transfer temporal knowledge from high-resource language knowledge graphs to low-resource
language knowledge graphs, addressing the issue of limited cross-lingual
alignment corpora between two temporal knowledge graphs by generating pseudoalignments via time information extracted by the representation module. Yang et al. (2023) proposed a bidirectional semantic
alignment-based similarity measurement method for mapping representations of diﬀerent languages into the same space, addressing issues of
diﬀering representation spaces between teacher and student models. Ge
et al. (2023) addressed the problem of feature distribution diﬀerences
between source and target languages in teacher-student networks by
adjusting the distance between source and target language features via
prototype networks for feature alignment.
Unlike these knowledge distillation methods, CLWKD maps source
language domain vectors to multilingual target language domain spaces
via a universal cross-lingual matrix W, achieving domain data augmentation and addressing the issue of diﬀering language spaces. During
model compression, CLWKD initializes the compressed model with the
transformer layers of CLWKD and uses bottleneck layers to reduce the
embedding size.
2.4. Mongolian
Mongolian, like Japanese, Korean, and Turkish, is an agglutinative
language. Fig. 2 illustrates the structure of the Mongolian word “factory”, which consists of a root (or stem) connected to a varying number
of suﬃxes. The root forms the basis for deriving new words and is the

Fig. 2. Example of the morphological structure of the Mongolian word “factory.” The root conveys basic meaning, such as “work” (noun). This is followed by the
sequential addition of word-forming aﬃxes that change the part of speech: ﬁrst deriving a verb (e.g., “do”) and then further deriving a noun (e.g., “factory”). In
addition, additional constituents may be attached to modify or constrain the noun, such as in the “factory attribute”.
5

Neural Networks 194 (2026) 108114

Y. Wang et al.

The following sections provide detailed descriptions of each module
and its implementation.
3.1. Cross-lingual multi-granularity semantic mapping
In cross-lingual domain semantic alignment tasks involving lowresource agglutinative languages, the scarcity of domain-speciﬁc parallel data and the structural diﬀerences between languages lead to semantic space inconsistencies, further increasing the diﬃculty of crosslingual alignment. To address these challenges, by leveraging multigranularity mapping matrices from general-domain data, the model ﬁrst
learns morphological and syntactic information across diﬀerent granularities and languages, which reduces the divergence between semantic
spaces of diﬀerent languages. In addition, word-level and sentence-level
alignment tasks can provide mutual supervision, enabling better overall alignment. After learning interlingual features from general-domain
data, the model can then focus on the alignment and transfer of domainspeciﬁc knowledge during the knowledge distillation stage, thereby reducing reliance on domain-speciﬁc data.
Therefore, our ﬁrst objective is to map the source language’s token, word, and sentence embeddings to the corresponding representations in the target language. Given source language vectors 𝑋 =
𝑥1 , 𝑥2 , 𝑥3 , … , 𝑥|𝑋| and target language vectors 𝑌 = 𝑦1 , 𝑦2 , 𝑦3 , … , 𝑦|𝑌 | , we
aim to learn a linear mapping matrix 𝑊 between the source and target
spaces so that 𝑊 𝑋 is mapped as close as possible to 𝑌 .

Fig. 3. Example of latin transliteration of Mongolian text. It includes three processing strategies for transliteration: Segmentation of aﬃxes—separating aﬃx
components from the original Mongolian word; Aﬃx removal—removing afﬁxes and retaining only the core part of the word; Root retention—preserving
only the root to retain the basic semantic meaning of the word.

fundamental unit preserving the word’s meaning. Suﬃxes attached to
the root alter the word’s part of speech and meaning, signiﬁcantly impacting the semantic context of sentences. The root combined with several suﬃxes forms a stem. Suﬃxes that are attached to the root (or stem)
through a narrow, uninterrupted space are called aﬃxes, which indicate
grammatical meanings such as case, number, and possession. A single
root (or stem) can have multiple aﬃxes to express diﬀerent grammatical
meanings (Wang, 2009). Owing to the complex morphological changes
in Mongolian word formation, various roots (or stems) with diﬀerent
suﬃxes can produce approximately one million Mongolian vocabulary
items. Examples of Mongolian Latin transliteration, where aﬃxes are
segmented and removed and the stem is retained, are shown in Fig. 3.
Studies have shown that segmenting Mongolian text can alleviate data
sparsity issues (Hou et al., 2009; Li et al., 2017; Ren et al., 2019).

𝑊 ∗ = arg

min

𝑊 ∈𝕄𝑑 (ℝ)

‖𝑊 𝑋 − 𝑌 ‖

(1)

where 𝑑 is the embedding dimension; 𝕄𝑑 (ℝ) is the real space of matrices of size 𝑑 × 𝑑; and 𝑋 and 𝑌 are alignment matrices of size 𝑑 × |𝑋|
that represent token, word, and sentence embeddings in the source and
target languages.
3.1.1. Multi-granularity embedding representation
Token embedding learning. Some existing studies (Ai & Huang,
2024), such as those based on monolingual word frequency modeling,
perform coarse-grained spatial structure alignment across multiple languages by ranking word frequencies. However, these approaches overlook true cross-lingual interaction information and do not optimize the
morphological characteristics of agglutinative languages, resulting in
clear limitations when modeling low-resource domain corpora, particularly for morphologically complex languages such as Mongolian. To address this issue, we further analyze the characteristics of low-resource
languages (e.g., Mongolian) within multilingual PLMs. Due to limited
corpus coverage, Mongolian representations in PLMs often suﬀer from
data sparsity and OOV problems. In addition, in real-world domain
corpora (such as Mongolian medical texts), we observe frequent codeswitching between Mongolian, Chinese, and English terms, thus providing a natural semantic bridge for cross-lingual representation sharing.
This phenomenon helps the model to better capture cross-lingual associations and enhances performance in practical tasks. To fully exploit this
characteristic, we ﬁrst perform Latin transliteration for Mongolian, mapping its character representation into the vocabulary space supported by
multilingual PLMs. This strategy maximizes the reuse of existing subword fragments, improves representation consistency between Mongolian and other languages, and eﬀectively mitigates the OOV problem.
On this basis, we further initialize Mongolian token embeddings using
the multilingual PLM’s embedding layer, enabling Mongolian representations to directly inherit semantic knowledge from high-resource languages such as Chinese and English at the early stage of training.
We then input the source language 𝑋 into its domain-speciﬁc PLM
(e.g., Chinese-BERT) and the target language 𝑌 into a multilingual PLM
(e.g., mBERT) and perform contextual encoding for their respective token representations. Speciﬁcally, let the input be a sentence-level token sequence consisting of 𝑛 vectors 𝑥1 , 𝑥2 , … , 𝑥𝑛 , and the output be a
new set of vectors 𝑜1 , 𝑜2 , … , 𝑜𝑛 corresponding to each input vector. Different three-parameter matrices 𝑊 𝑞 , 𝑊 𝑘 , 𝑊 𝑣 are used to map 𝑥𝑖 into

3. Method
The CLWKD framework consists of two stages, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
In the ﬁrst stage (Section 3.1), we construct a uniﬁed cross-lingual
multi-granularity semantic space based on general-domain parallel data
between the source and target languages. This stage consists of three
functional modules: In module 1
⃝, we apply a morphological decomposition strategy to the target language (e.g., Mongolian). Each word is
segmented into a stem and its aﬃxes to address the challenges of morphological complexity and out-of-vocabulary issues commonly found
in agglutinative languages. Based on a pretrained language model, we
construct shared token, word, and sentence-level embeddings using a
uniﬁed embedding layer. In Module 2
⃝, we introduce a generative adversarial network. The pretrained generator projects source-language
embeddings into the target-language semantic space. The discriminator
then determines whether these projected embeddings come from real
target-language representations. This adversarial setup helps the generator learn an eﬀective cross-lingual semantic mapping. In module 3
⃝, we
incorporate high-conﬁdence word and sentence pairs to reﬁne the mapping matrix under unsupervised or weakly supervised conditions. This
step improves both the accuracy and stability of the learned alignment.
In the second stage (Section 3.2), a domain-speciﬁc PLM trained
on a high-resource language serves as the teacher model. The multigranularity mapping matrices learned in Stage 1, along with a small
amount of domain-speciﬁc parallel data, are used as a bridge to transfer and align domain knowledge to the multilingual PLM for the lowresource language. During this process, we apply a mean squared error
(MSE) loss to align the [CLS] representations of the source and target
languages at the sentence level. Meanwhile, the student model incorporates a bottleneck embedding structure and a parameter recycling
mechanism to enable model compression while preserving cross-lingual
alignment capability.
6

Neural Networks 194 (2026) 108114

Y. Wang et al.

•

additional constituents(𝑤𝑖 ) = {𝑥(𝑚+1)
, … , 𝑥(𝑘)
𝑖
𝑖 }: the additional constituents.

We design three decomposition strategies for constructing subwordlevel word embeddings using mean pooling:
Root Strategy. Only the root is retained:
1∑
Emb(𝑥(𝑗)
𝑖 )
𝑟 𝑗=1
𝑟

𝐞Root (𝑤𝑖 ) =

(5)

Seg Strategy. The stem and aﬃx are separated into two components:
𝐞stem
(𝑤𝑖 ) =
Seg

1 ∑
Emb(𝑥(𝑗)
𝑖 )
𝑚 𝑗=1

𝐞aﬃx
(𝑤𝑖 ) =
Seg

𝑘
∑
1
Emb(𝑥(𝑗)
𝑖 )
𝑘 − 𝑚 𝑗=𝑚+1

𝑚

Fig. 4. Illustration of self-attention weight computation.

𝑞𝑖 = 𝑊 𝑞 𝑥𝑖 , 𝑘𝑖 = 𝑊 𝑘 𝑥𝑖 , 𝑣𝑖 = 𝑊 𝑣 𝑥𝑖 , which denote the vectors corresponding to the query, key and value, respectively. The formula for 𝑜𝑖 is as
follows:
𝑜𝑖 =

𝑛
∑

𝛼𝑖,𝑗 𝑣𝑗 ,

𝛼𝑖,𝑗 = softmax( ̂
𝜶)𝑗 ,

𝛼̂ 𝑖,𝑗 = attn(𝑞𝑖 , 𝑘𝑗 )

(6)

Cut Strategy. The additional constituents are removed, and only the ﬁnal stem is preserved:
1 ∑
Emb(𝑥(𝑗)
𝑖 )
𝑚 𝑗=1
𝑚

𝐞Cut (𝑤𝑖 ) =

(2)

(7)

𝑗=1

Here, Emb(⋅) denotes the embedding of each subword, and the mean operator is used to aggregate multiple subword embeddings into a uniﬁed
word-level representation.
Through this mechanism, the model can eﬀectively unify the representation of words with complex morphology, alleviating the issue
of word-level distribution sparsity. A schematic of the decomposition
process is shown in Fig. 2, and the eﬀects of this decomposition are
discussed in Section 5.1.
Sentence embedding learning. At the sentence level, to obtain the
global semantic representation, we use the representation vector at the
[CLS] position as the sentence embedding:

where 𝛼𝑖,𝑗 denotes the attentional weight between 𝑥𝑖 and 𝑥𝑗 , with larger
values indicating greater correlation, as illustrated in Fig. 4.
When self-attention is normalized, it is not possible to assign larger
attention values to multiple inputs at the same time, so multiple sets
of self-attention models are used to produce multiple sets of diﬀerent
attention results, thus enhancing the expressive power of the model, as
shown in Eq. (3):
MultiHead(𝑄, 𝐾, 𝑉 ) = Concat(head1 , … , headℎ )𝑊 𝑂

(3)

where
each
attention
head
is
computed
as
ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑖 =
𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑄𝑊𝑖𝑄 , 𝐾𝑊𝑖𝐾 , 𝑉 𝑊𝑖𝑉 ), and 𝑄, 𝐾, and 𝑉 are the input token embedding matrices; and 𝑊 𝑂 denotes the output projection
matrix.
Word embedding learning. In our experiments, we selected Chinese, Mongolian, Korean, and English as target languages and applied
language-speciﬁc preprocessing accordingly. For Chinese texts, we used
the Jieba tokenizer for word segmentation. In contrast, Mongolian, Korean, and English naturally use whitespace to separate words and thus
do not require additional segmentation. However, when PLM tokenizers
are used, words in these languages may still be further split into multiple
subword tokens, which can hinder accurate word-level semantic modeling. To address this issue, we introduce word boundary information to
identify the token span corresponding to each original word and compute word-level representations via mean pooling. Speciﬁcally, we let
the 𝑘-th word 𝑤𝑘 span the token sequence positions (𝑖𝑘 , 𝑗𝑘 ). The wordlevel embedding of 𝑤𝑘 is computed as follows:
𝑤𝑘 =

𝑗𝑘
∑
1
𝑡
𝑗𝑘 − 𝑖𝑘 + 1 𝑚=𝑖 𝑚

𝐬 = 𝑥[CLS] ∈ ℝ𝑑

tence in the PLM, representing the aggregated semantic representation
of the entire sentence.
3.1.2. Generative adversarial layer
To achieve semantic alignment between the source and target languages under unsupervised or weakly supervised conditions, we introduce a generative adversarial network structure. This structure consists
of a generator and a discriminator, with the goal of learning a crosslingual mapping matrix 𝑊 such that the source language embeddings
approximate the distribution of the target language.
The core of the generator is a trainable mapping matrix 𝑊 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑑 ,
which projects the source language embedding 𝑥𝑖 into the target language embedding space, such that 𝑦̂𝑖 = 𝑊 𝑥𝑖 . Ideally, the distribution of
𝑦̂𝑖 should match the distribution of the real target language embedding
𝑦𝑖 as closely as possible. The goal of the generator is to deceive the discriminator into believing that the mapped representations come from
the target language. The loss function for the generator is as follows:

(4)

𝑘

Here, 𝑡𝑚 ∈ ℝ𝑑 denotes the embedding of the 𝑚-th token, and 𝑑 is the embedding dimension. The denominator 𝑗𝑘 − 𝑖𝑘 + 1 represents the number
of tokens corresponding to the word, thereby serving as a normalization factor to ensure balanced representation across words of varying
lengths.
To address the data sparsity caused by rich morphological variations
in agglutinative languages (e.g., Mongolian), we adopt a morphological
decomposition strategy. Each word 𝑤𝑖 is decomposed into a sequence
(2)
(𝑘)
of tokens {𝑥(1)
𝑖 , 𝑥𝑖 , … , 𝑥𝑖 }. The decomposition granularity is deﬁned
as follows:
•
•

(8)

Here, 𝑥[CLS] is the output of the [CLS] token at the beginning of the sen-

1∑
log 𝑃𝜃𝐷 (source = 0 ∣ 𝑊 𝑥𝑖 )
𝑛 𝑖=1
𝑛

𝐿𝐺 (𝑊 ∣ 𝜃𝐷 ) = −

1 ∑
log 𝑃𝜃𝐷 (source = 1 ∣ 𝑦𝑖 )
𝑚 𝑖=1
𝑚

−

(9)

The discriminator 𝐷 is a binary classiﬁcation network. The training
objective of the discriminator is to classify real target language embeddings 𝑦𝑖 as positive, and to classify the projected embeddings from the
generator 𝑦̂𝑖 = 𝑊 𝑥𝑖 as negative. Accordingly, the binary cross-entropy
loss of the discriminator is deﬁned as:
𝑛
1∑
𝐿𝐷 (𝜃𝐷 ∣ 𝑊 ) = −
log 𝑃𝜃𝐷 (source = 1 ∣ 𝑊 𝑥𝑖 )
𝑛 𝑖=1

(𝑟)
root(𝑤𝑖 ) = {𝑥(1)
𝑖 , … , 𝑥𝑖 }: the root of the word;

(𝑚)
stem(𝑤𝑖 ) = {𝑥(1)
𝑖 , … , 𝑥𝑖 }: the stem of the word, where 𝑚 ≥ 𝑟;

7

Neural Networks 194 (2026) 108114

Y. Wang et al.

1 ∑
log 𝑃𝜃𝐷 (source = 0 ∣ 𝑦𝑖 )
𝑚 𝑖=1
𝑚

−

ers for 𝑙 = 2, … , 𝐿; and 𝐖(𝐿+1) ∈ ℝ1×ℎ denotes the weight matrix of the
output layer. The activation function is deﬁned as:

(10)

LeakyReLU(𝑥) = max(0.2𝑥, 𝑥)

To enhance robustness, we apply label smoothing to the positive
samples. Let 𝛼 denote the smoothing factor, then the label for target
language samples is set to 1 − 𝛼:
𝐿𝐷 (𝜃𝐷 ∣ 𝑊 ) = −

The output is passed through a sigmoid function:

𝑛
∑

1
log 𝑃𝜃𝐷 (source = 1 ∣ 𝑊 𝑥𝑖 )
𝑛 𝑖=1

𝜎(𝑥) =

𝑚 [
1 ∑
(1 − 𝛼) log 𝑃𝜃𝐷 (source = 0 ∣ 𝑦𝑖 )
𝑚 𝑖=1
]
+ 𝛼 log 𝑃𝜃𝐷 (source = 1 ∣ 𝑦𝑖 )

1
1 + 𝑒−𝑥

(14)

It is well known that although GANs can be applied for unsupervised
alignment learning, their training process is highly challenging. In particular, during the early stages of training, there is often a capability
imbalance between the generator and the discriminator. The discriminator typically converges faster and dominates the adversarial process.
This imbalance hinders the optimization of the generator and leads to
poor alignment quality.
To address this issue, we introduce a pretraining phase, where a
small set of high-quality word pairs is used to train an initial mapping
matrix 𝑊0∗ . This initialization enhances the generator’s alignment capability in the early stages, accelerates model convergence, and improves
the semantic consistency of the generated samples. Speciﬁcally, we obtain a set of word pairs {(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖 )}𝑁
from 5000 high-quality parallel sen𝑖=1
tence pairs via fast_align (Dyer et al., 2010). Then, using the obtained
word pairs, we minimize the following objective:

−

(11)

Algorithm 1 Adversarial training loop.
Require: Number of epochs 𝑁, batch size 𝐵, dataset , BERT encoder
, mapping module 𝑀, discriminator 𝐷, statistics dictionary stats
Ensure: Optimized mapping 𝑀 ∗
1: for 𝑛epoch = 1 to 𝑁 do
2: 𝑛dis ← 0, 𝑛map ← 0, 𝑛proc ← 0
3: for each batch (𝑋𝑎 , 𝑀𝑎 , 𝑋𝑏 , 𝑀𝑏 , 𝐵𝑎 , 𝐵𝑏 , 𝐵𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘 , 𝐵𝑏𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘 , idx) ∈  do
4:
𝐻𝑎 ← (𝑋𝑎 , 𝑀𝑎 ), 𝐻𝑏 ← (𝑋𝑏 , 𝑀𝑏 )
5:
𝑊𝑎 ← token2word(𝐻𝑎 , 𝐵𝑎 , 𝐵𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘 )
6:
𝑊𝑏 ← token2word(𝐻𝑏 , 𝐵𝑏 , 𝐵𝑏𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘 )
7:
try:
8:
dis_step(𝑊𝑎 , 𝑊𝑏 , stats)
9:
catch:
10:
Log idx
11:
12:
𝑛dis ← 𝑛dis + 1
13:
if 𝑛dis mod dis_steps = 0 then
14:
try:
15:
mapping_step(stats)
16:
catch:
17:
Log idx
18:
19:
𝑛map ← 𝑛map + 1
20:
end if
21:
if 𝑛dis mod save_every = 0 then
22:
𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐 sent ← eval_sim()
23:
𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐 word ← dist_mean_cosine()
24:
𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 ← 𝜆 ⋅ 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐 sent + (1 − 𝜆) ⋅ 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐 word
25:
𝑎𝑐𝑐 𝐷 ← eval_dev_dis()
26:
if 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 > best_score then
27:
Save model checkpoint
28:
end if
29:
end if
30: end for
31: Save model: “epoch-𝑛epoch ”
32: Update learning rate using 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐 word
33: if learning rate < min_lr then
34:
break
35: end if
36: end for

𝑊0∗ = arg min
𝑊

𝑁
∑
𝑖=1

‖𝑊 𝑥𝑖 − 𝑦𝑖 ‖2
‖
‖2

(15)

This problem has an analytical solution, and the optimal solution is obtained through singular value decomposition (SVD):
𝑊0∗ = 𝑈 𝑉 ⊤ ,

where

𝑈 Σ𝑉 ⊤ = SVD(𝑌 𝑋 ⊤ )

(16)

By fully exploring the interdependencies between word alignment
and sentence alignment tasks, this paper introduces two cross-lingual
similarity evaluation strategies during training, which are used for
model parameter selection and alignment performance evaluation: word
mean similarity (Conneau et al., 2017) and sentence similarity.
Word Mean Similarity. This metric measures the closeness between
the source and target language embedding spaces. Let {𝑥𝑖 }1000
represent
𝑖=1
the embeddings of the 1000 most frequent words in the source language.
For each word 𝑥𝑖 , we retrieve the most similar word 𝑦̂𝑖 from the target
language embedding set and compute their cosine similarity :
1 ∑
cos(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦̂𝑖 )
1000 𝑖=1
1000

Words_Mean =

(17)

Sentence Similarity. This metric is calculated via the [CLS] token
representation as the global semantic embedding of the sentence. The
cosine similarity between the source language sentence 𝑠𝑥 and the target
language sentence 𝑠𝑦 is computed as:
Sentsim = cos(𝐬𝑥 , 𝐬𝑦 ) =

𝐬⊤
𝑥 𝐬𝑦
‖𝐬𝑥 ‖ ⋅ ‖𝐬𝑦 ‖

(18)

We deﬁne a composite similarity metric that integrates both word-level
and sentence-level information:

In our experiments, the discriminator is implemented as a multi-layer
perceptron (MLP). Let the input be an embedding vector 𝐳 ∈ ℝ𝑑 , with 𝐿
hidden layers and hidden dimension ℎ. The structure of the discriminator is deﬁned as follows:
𝐡(0) = Dropoutin (𝑧)
(
(
))
𝐡(𝑙) = Dropout LeakyReLU 𝐖(𝑙) 𝐡(𝑙−1) + 𝐛(𝑙) ,
( (𝐿+1) (𝐿)
)
𝐃(𝑧) = 𝜎 𝐖
𝐡 + 𝐛(𝐿+1)

(13)

Score(𝑡) = 𝜆 ⋅ Sent(𝑡)
+ (1 − 𝜆) ⋅ Words_Mean(𝑡)
sim

(19)

The entire adversarial training process consists of the following steps
(see Algorithm 1):
1) Initialize the mapping matrix 𝑊 and discriminator parameters 𝜃𝐷 ;
2) Fix 𝑊 and update the discriminator 𝐷, minimizing D ;
3) Fix the discriminator and update the generator 𝑊 , minimizing G ;
Repeat Steps 2)-3) until the discriminator can no longer distinguish
between real and generated samples (training converges).

for 𝑙 = 1, … , 𝐿 (12)

Here, 𝐖(1) ∈ ℝℎ×𝑑 denotes the weight matrix of the ﬁrst hidden layer;
𝐖(𝑙) ∈ ℝℎ×ℎ represents the weight matrices of the remaining hidden lay8

Neural Networks 194 (2026) 108114

Y. Wang et al.

3.1.3. Optimizing the mapping layer
After GAN training, the mapping matrix is further optimized by constructing high-quality aligned lexicons. We use both unsupervised and
weakly supervised methods to build these aligned lexicons.
Unsupervised method: Using the mapping matrix to project bilingual word embeddings into a shared space, aligned lexicons are constructed by calculating the word similarity with CSLS:
CSLS(𝑊 𝑥𝑠 , 𝑦𝑡 ) = 2 cos(𝑊 𝑥𝑠 , 𝑦𝑡 ) − 𝑟𝑇 (𝑊 𝑥𝑠 ) − 𝑟𝑆 (𝑦𝑡 )

Mapping-then-pooling strategy: After word embeddings are processed through a mapping matrix, the semantic information of the target language can be more accurately reﬂected. This information is then
aggregated via the [CLS] token of the PLM to improve the quality of
sentence embeddings.
3.2.2. Model compression
Inspired by ALBERT (Lan, 2019), we design the smaller multilingual
student model CLWKD_S by using parameter cycling and embedding bottleneck strategies. Parameter cycling: We initialize the smaller student
model CLWKD_S with the parameters of the ﬁrst 𝑀 layers from CLWKD
𝑅𝑈 = {𝑖 |𝑖 ∈ [1, 𝑀]}, where 𝑖 represents the 𝑖-th transformer layer.
Embedding bottleneck: CLWKD, which is based on multilingual PLM
training, usually requires large vocabularies 𝑉 to support multiple languages, which leads to a very large number of parameters in the embedding layer. We add a bottleneck layer of size 𝐵 between the embedding
layer and the hidden layer 𝐻 (Lan, 2019); thus, the size of the embedding layer is reduced from 𝑂(𝑉 × 𝐻) to 𝑂(𝑉 × 𝐵 + 𝐵 × 𝐻). As shown in
Fig. 5, we align the CLWKD and CLWKD_S embedding spaces via the loss
𝑠
𝑡𝑖
function in Eq. (27), where ℎ𝑀𝑖 , ℎ𝑀
denote the output of the CLWKD em-

(20)

where 𝑟𝑇 (𝑊 𝑥𝑠 ) is the average cosine similarity of the top 𝑘 most similar
word vectors in the target vector space after the source word vector 𝑥 is
mapped by the generator, and 𝑟𝑆 (𝑦𝑡 ) is the average cosine similarity of
the top 𝑘 most similar word vectors in the source word vector space for
the target vector 𝑦.
{
Aligned
𝑦1 − 𝑦2 ≥ 𝜇
𝑊 (𝐺(𝑥), 𝑦1 ) =
(21)
Unaligned 𝑦1 − 𝑦2 < 𝜇
where 𝑦𝑖 represents the top 𝑘 most similar words in the target language
space found for the source language word 𝑥 . When 𝑦1 − 𝑦2 is greater
than the threshold, the corresponding target language-aligned word is
considered found; otherwise, it is considered not found.
Weakly supervised method: Unsupervised contextual word alignment construction is performed based on word alignment tools. We refer
to this method as weakly supervised because there are some supervised
signals, but the accuracy is not 100 %.
In this stage, although SVD is fast for training, its memory consumption increases as the amount of data increases. Therefore, we use gradient descent (GD) to optimize the mapping matrix 𝑊 , seeking an approximate solution. The loss function is shown in Eq. (22), where 𝑁 is
the batch size.
loss =

𝑁
∑

1
(𝑊 𝑥𝑖 − 𝑦𝑖 )2
|𝑁| 𝑖=1

𝑠

𝑡

bedding layer and ℎ𝑆𝑖 , ℎ𝑆𝑖 denote the output of the CLWKD_S bottleneck
layer. After obtaining the smaller student model, we use a second-stage
approach to transfer the domain knowledge from the teacher model to
the smaller student model CLWKD_S.
[
( ′
)2 ]
𝑁
𝑡𝑖
1 ∑ ( 𝑠𝑖
𝑠 )2
𝑡
loss =
ℎ𝑀 − ℎ𝑆𝑖 + ℎ𝑀
− ℎ𝑆𝑖
(27)
|𝑁| 𝑖=1
4. Experimentation
4.1. Data and settings
In the experiments, we selected Mongolian and Korean, both of
which are agglutinative languages, as target languages, with highresource Chinese as the source language. Mongolian, as a typical
low-resource agglutinative language, is underrepresented in many

(22)

3.2. Cross-lingual knowledge distillation
3.2.1. Knowledge transfer and semantic alignment
As shown in Fig. 1, in the second stage, we use the domain-speciﬁc
pretrained model (PLM) of the source language as the teacher network
T and a multilingual PLM as the student network S to perform crosslingual semantic alignment and knowledge transfer. Speciﬁcally, given
a parallel sentence pair between the source language (e.g., Chinese) and
the target language (e.g., Mongolian) ⟨𝑠𝑖 , 𝑡𝑖 ⟩, we ﬁrst input the Chinese
𝑠
sentence 𝑠𝑖 into the teacher model 𝑇 to obtain the word embeddings ℎ𝑇𝑖 .
Using the mapping matrix W obtained from the ﬁrst stage, we map the
word embeddings to the target language space:
𝑠′

𝑠

𝐸𝑇𝑖 = 𝐸𝑇𝑖 × 𝑊

(23)

To obtain the sentence-level representation, we further apply the CLS
pooling operation to the word embeddings, resulting in sentence representation as follows:
𝑠′

𝑠′

𝐸𝑇CLS = CLS(𝐸𝑇𝑖 )

(24)

Moreover, the parallel word pairs ⟨𝑠𝑖 , 𝑡𝑖 ⟩ are input into the 𝑆 model to
generate word embeddings 𝐸𝑆𝑠𝑖 and 𝐸𝑆𝑡𝑖 , and the CLS pooling operation
is applied to obtain:
𝐸𝑆CLS = CLS(𝐸𝑆𝑠𝑖 ),

𝐸𝑆CLS = CLS(𝐸𝑆𝑡𝑖 )

(25)

We achieve knowledge transfer and alignment by minimizing the mean
squared error (MSE) between the outputs of the teacher and student
models, and the loss function is deﬁned as:
loss =

𝑁 [
]
𝑠 ′
𝑠 ′
1 ∑
𝑠
𝑡
(𝐸𝑇CLS − 𝐸𝑆𝐶𝐿𝑆 )2 + (𝐸𝑇CLS − 𝐸𝑆𝐶𝐿𝑆 )2
|𝑁| 𝑖=1

(26)
Fig. 5. Model compression.
9

Neural Networks 194 (2026) 108114

Y. Wang et al.

Table 1
Distributions of the datasets.
Dataset

Units

Training set

Dev set

Test set

Total

CWMT
KCSP
MMCPT + CWMT
CMLQA
CM-Edu
CK-Med + KCSP
MDNER
MLNER

Sentence Pairs
Sentence Pairs
Sentence Pairs
Sentence Pairs
Sentence Pairs
Sentence Pairs
Sentences
Sentences

66,000
10,000
1695+10000
8000
1658+10000
4800+3200
3065
1920

1000
1000
213+200
1000
208+200
600+200
383
240

200
200
213+200
200
207+200
600+200
383
240

67,200
11,200
2121+10400
9200
2073+10400
6000+3600
3831
2400

is applied to stabilize early updates, using a learning rate of 16 × 10−5 .
In the compression phase, the student model retains only 3 transformer
layers.

mainstream multilingual pre-trained models (such as mBERT and XLM),
making its domain semantic alignment tasks particularly challenging. To
further evaluate the model’s generalizability, we extended the experiments to Korean. Although Korean is considered a high-resource language in terms of pre-training corpora, it still lacks large-scale KoreanChinese parallel corpora in speciﬁc domains, making this task equally
representative and challenging.
In the ﬁrst stage of CLWKD, we used general-domain parallel corpora
for Mongolian-Chinese and Korean-Chinese, including publicly available datasets such as the CWMT and KCSP.3 In the second stage, we
used parallel corpora from three domains: medical, legal, and educational. Since there is no publicly available Mongolian-Chinese medical domain dataset, we constructed our own Mongolian-Chinese medical terminology parallel dataset (MMCPT). For the legal domain, we
used the publicly available CMLQA4 dataset. The educational domain
data were sourced from Mongolian-Chinese abstracts of master’s and
doctoral theses from Inner Mongolia Normal University, and we built
the Mongolian-Chinese educational parallel dataset (MC-Edu). For the
Korean-Chinese medical domain, we used the publicly available Korean
medical monolingual dataset KBMC5 and generated Chinese translations
via machine translation to create the Korean-Chinese medical parallel
dataset (CK-Med).
The performance of CLWKD was evaluated through three downstream tasks: cross-lingual word alignment, cross-lingual sentence retrieval, and cross-lingual entity recognition. The evaluation data for the
word alignment and sentence retrieval tasks were selected from parts of
the aforementioned corpora. For the entity recognition evaluation, we
used the CCKS 2020 entity recognition dataset, along with the v1 version
of the Mongolian medicine entity recognition dataset (MDNER) and a
small-scale legal entity recognition dataset (MLNER), both constructed
in our lab. Detailed information about all the datasets is provided in
Table 1.
In the experiments, we used MC-BERT (Wang, 2023) as the multilingual PLM for low-resource languages. MC-BERT is a model ﬁne-tuned
on 150,000 Mongolian monolingual sentences and 67,200 MongolianChinese parallel sentence pairs based on multilingual BERT.
In the adversarial training framework, the discriminator is a threelayer perceptron (MLP) with a hidden layer size of 2048. The dropout
rate for the input layer is 0.1, whereas the dropout rate for the hidden layers is set to 0. The smoothing factor is 0.2, and the generator
is updated every 5 steps. The batch size for both the discriminator and
generator is 32, with a learning rate of 0.1 and a learning rate decay
rate of 0.95. The adversarial training runs for 50 epochs. The alignment
vector threshold is set to 0.002. In the reﬁnement phase, the mapping
matrix optimizer uses SGD with a learning rate of 0.1 trained for 20
epochs.
In the cross-lingual knowledge distillation phase, training is conducted for 100 epochs with a batch size of 32. A warmup rate of 0.1

4.2. Compared models
To evaluate the model’s cross-lingual semantic alignment performance at diﬀerent granularities, three cross-lingual evaluation tasks
were designed: word alignment, bitext retrieval, and cross-lingual entity recognition. The comparison models included classic cross-lingual
semantic alignment models, multilingual PLMs, recent ﬁne-tuned multilingual PLMs, and knowledge distillation models.
Adv-SVD-CSLS (Conneau et al., 2017) and Adv-SVD-NN (Conneau
et al., 2017): Based on GANs, these models are further trained by constructing aligned words and using the CSLS and NN methods to select
nearest-neighbor word embeddings during evaluation tasks.
CLBT_SVD (Wang et al., 2019) and CLBT_GD (Wang et al., 2019):
These methods ﬁrst obtain contextually aligned word pairs via fast_align
and then compute contextual word embeddings via BERT. The mapping
matrix W is then learned via SVD and GD.
mBERT (Kenton & Toutanova, 2019): A multilingual BERT model
released by Google, supporting over 100 languages and demonstrating
strong cross-lingual transfer capabilities.
CINO (Yang et al., 2022): This method continues training XLM-R on
corpora of various minority languages, enhancing its understanding of
Tibetan, Mongolian, Uyghur, Kazakh, Korean, Zhuang, Cantonese, and
other minority languages and dialects.
InfoXLM (Chi et al., 2020): This method continues training XLMR by masked language modeling, translation language modeling and
translation ranking tasks.
XLM-Align (Chi et al., 2021): This method performs self-supervised
word alignment on parallel sentences and trains by randomly masking
some tokens in bilingual text pairs.
DAP (Li et al., 2023): This is a state-of-the-art cross-lingual sentence
embedding model that uses token-level information.
AoE (Li & Li, 2024): Enhances the precision of semantic representations by optimizing angular diﬀerences in complex spaces and mining
text similarities within saturated regions.
mKD (Reimers & Gurevych, 2020): This model learns multilingual
sentence embeddings via cross-lingual knowledge distillation.
msKD (Ding et al., 2022): This method trains small cross-lingual
models via multistage knowledge distillation.
IMASCL (Park et al., 2024): It primarily guides the student model
to learn relationships between cross-lingual sentences by aligning the
monolingual sentence similarity structures of the teacher model.
All the comparison models, except for CINO, were trained on our
datasets.
4.3. Word alignment
On the basis of previous work (Chi et al., 2021), word-level semantic
alignment performance was evaluated via word alignment. Word alignment involves identifying corresponding word pairs within parallel sentences.

3 KCSP is a Korean-Chinese parallel corpus obtained from the OPUS project
(https://opus.nlpl.eu)
4
http://csdata.org/en/p/1061/
5 https://huggingface.co/datasets/SungJoo/KBMC

10

Neural Networks 194 (2026) 108114

Y. Wang et al.

Table 2
Evaluation results for word alignment.
Model

Adv_SVD_CSLS
_NN
CLBT_SVD_CSLS
_GD_CSLS
CINO
InfoXLM
XLM-Align
CLWKD_SVD_CSLS
_GD_CSLS
_GD_NN

Weakly Supervised

performance of mBERT+W is signiﬁcantly lower; on the one hand, this
is due to the limited coverage of Mongolian during the mBERT pretraining process (we used the ﬁne-tuned version, while the original mBERT
model hardly covered Mongolian). On the other hand, the mapping matrix W is the result of CLWKD’s ﬁrst-stage training, which was trained
solely on the general Mongolian-Chinese dataset and does not include
domain-speciﬁc data, thus limiting its domain-speciﬁc word alignment
capability.
After introducing a small amount of domain data, further training
of CLWKD signiﬁcantly outperforms the ﬁne-tuned InfoXLM and XLMAlign models. The Avg_F1 score improved by 9.26 % and 8.41 % in the
legal and educational domains, respectively. The DAP model, which
also performs token-level alignment during ﬁne-tuning, shows competitive performance in word alignment tasks: the Avg_F1 score improved
by 0.23 % in the legal and educational domains. This ﬁnding indicates
that token alignment methods have a positive eﬀect on improving word
alignment performance. Compared with the state-of-the-art text embedding similarity model AoE, CLWKD achieved an Avg_F1 improvement of
0.14 % in the legal and educational domains; this suggests that CLWKD
is more suitable for ﬁne-grained semantic alignment tasks such as word
alignment, where weak supervision via parallel sentences is employed.
Moreover, the experimental results vary when diﬀerent domain models
are used as teacher networks in CLWKD, indicating that the performance
of the teacher model itself signiﬁcantly aﬀects the alignment results. A
detailed analysis of this will be provided in Section 4.4, in conjunction
with sentence retrieval performance.
To evaluate the model’s cross-lingual word alignment capability on
other low-resource agglutinative languages, we conducted word-level
alignment experiments on the smaller Korean-Chinese dataset. The experimental results are shown in Table 4. Since mBERT’s pretraining covers both Korean and Chinese, its performance on this task is signiﬁcantly
better than the Mongolian-Chinese word alignment results presented in
Table 3. However, the mBERT pretraining process involves training on a
large amount of multilingual data without explicitly utilizing semantic
alignment information, which limits its alignment performance. When
we trained the cross-lingual semantic alignment mapping matrix on
general-domain parallel corpora and applied it to mBERT, the model’s
word alignment performance improved signiﬁcantly in both the general and medical domains. Building upon this, the CLWKD model, obtained through knowledge distillation using cross-lingual domain data,
demonstrated even greater advantages in both domains. Compared with
the InfoXLM, XLM-Align, DAP, and AoE models ﬁne-tuned with domain data, CLWKD achieved the highest F1 score improvements of
12.91 %, 9.22 %, 2.4 %, and 3.55 % in the medical domain, respectively, and 4.26 %, 2.13 %, 4.06 %, and 3.55 % in the general domain,
respectively. These experimental results indicate that combining crosslingual semantic alignment mapping with domain knowledge distillation can eﬀectively address the shortcomings of pretrained models in
word-level semantic alignment, signiﬁcantly improving word alignment
accuracy.
Overall, domain-speciﬁc semantic alignment methods primarily
use sentence-level alignment as the main training objective, resulting
in relatively weaker performance on word-level alignment. To more
comprehensively evaluate the model’s alignment capability, we next
focus on analyzing its performance in the domain sentence alignment task and further analyze the performance of the two stages of
CLWKD.

Unsupervised

P

R

F1

P

R

F1

54.97
53.41
55.37
60.80
51.99
51.54
45.82
68.25
71.96
69.30

59.05
57.32
59.45
65.47
51.43
45.32
39.43
57.56
60.00
54.76

56.94
55.30
57.34
63.05
51.71
48.23
42.39
62.45
65.43
61.18

42.91
36.94
–
–
–
–
–
–
47.80
41.85

45.71
39.39
–
–
–
–
–
–
43.01
36.96

44.27
38.13
–
–
–
–
–
–
45.28
39.25

Table 2 shows the precision, recall and F1 scores for word alignment
in both languages. In weakly supervised learning, our CLWKD_GD_CSLS
model outperformed the classic Adv_SVD_CSLS and Adv_SVD_NN models, with F1 improvements of 8.49 % and 10.13 %, respectively, in
Mongolian-Chinese word vector alignment, demonstrating the superiority of our proposed method over traditional models. Compared with
the CLBT_GD_CSLS model, our CLWKD_GD_CSLS model showed a 2.38 %
improvement in the evaluation task and a 5.11 % improvement over
the CLBT_SVD_CSLS model, indicating that the generative adversarial
network (GAN) eﬀectively reduces the distance between the Mongolian and Chinese vector spaces.Compared with the pre-trained CINO
model, the SVD method used in CLWKD showed a 10.74 % improvement, whereas the GD method resulted in a 13.72 % improvement. Furthermore, compared with the ﬁne-tuned InfoXLM and XLM-Align models, the CLWKD_GD_CSLS method yielded enhancements of 17.2 % and
23.04 %, respectively. These comparison results fully demonstrate that
weakly supervised and self-supervised training methods that rely solely
on limited data cannot achieve the desired results when the multilingual
XLM-R large model is used.In contrast, CLWKD signiﬁcantly improves
performance in cross-lingual word alignment tasks through more eﬀective alignment methods and optimization strategies. This suggests that
in multilingual tasks, appropriate alignment techniques and advanced
optimization methods are crucial for fully realizing model potential, especially when data are limited.
Compared with the baseline model, our unsupervised learning models yielded improvements of 1.01 % and 6.03 %. In addition, among all
the models, the CSLS method consistently outperformed the NN method
in ﬁnding aligned word vectors, with the F1 score being higher by up to
6.03 %.
In the experiments, we also attempted to introduce the CycleGAN
cyclic consistency constraint strategy. However, during training, we frequently encounter gradient vanishing or gradient explosion issues, making it diﬃcult for the model to converge stably. CycleGAN relies on the
cycle consistency loss of “A → B → A” and “B → A → B” to ensure
reversible transformations. However, owing to signiﬁcant diﬀerences
in syntax, word order, and morphology between Mongolian and Chinese, maintaining a one-to-one correspondence when transforming back
is challenging, thus causing the cycle consistency constraint to fail. In
contrast, the standard GAN optimizes only the distribution alignment
of cross-lingual mappings, making it potentially more stable for text
alignment tasks. CycleGAN was originally designed for style transfer
tasks, but owing to the large structural diﬀerences between Mongolian and Chinese, its eﬀectiveness in unsupervised alignment may be
limited. Additionally, CycleGAN is sensitive to data distribution consistency, making it prone to optimization diﬃculties or mode collapse
in low-resource scenarios. Although we attempted to combine parallel
data and word pairs for training, achieving stable mapping results was
diﬃcult.
Table 3 presents the word alignment results for the MongolianChinese legal and educational domain datasets. It is evident that the

4.4. Bitext retrieval
Based on previous works (Artetxe & Schwenk, 2019; Chi et al., 2020;
Feng et al., 2020), we evaluate the sentence-level semantic alignment
capability via the dual-text retrieval task. The evaluation metrics include
the average retrieval accuracy from the source language to the target
language (s2t) and from the target language to the source language (t2s).
Tables 5 and 6 present the sentence retrieval performance of CLWKD on
11

Neural Networks 194 (2026) 108114

Y. Wang et al.

Table 3
Evaluation results of word alignment on the Mongolian-Chinese datasets in the legal and education domains.
Model

Teacher Model

Law

mBERT+W
InfoXLM
XLM-Align
DAP
AoE
CLWKD
CLWKD
CLWKD
CLWKD
CLWKD

LegalRoBERTa/TAL-EduBERT
RoBERTa-wwm-ext
Zh-BERT
CKIP BERT
Lawformer

Education

P

R

F1

P

R

F1

Avg_F1

15.30
34.47
36.65
50.44
45.85

16.52
36.25
46.19
50.90
54.87

15.89
35.35
40.87
50.67
49.94

14.02
47.96
40.09
50.79
51.48

17.13
51.87
44.02
54.50
55.66

15.42
49.84
46.02
52.58
53.48

15.66
42.60
43.45
51.63
51.72

46.15
44.44
45.44
45.50
45.66

54.93
52.85
54.22
53.98
54.26

50.16
48.28
49.44
49.38
49.59

51.41
49.14
49.13
–
–

55.88
53.49
53.11
–
–

53.55
51.22
51.04
–
–

51.86
49.75
50.24
–
–

Table 4
Evaluation results of word alignment on the Korean-Chinese cross-lingual datasets.
Model

Teacher Model

mBERT
mBERT+W
InfoXLM
XLM-Align
DAP
AoE
CLWKD
CLWKD
CLWKD
CLWKD

MedBERT
ERNIE-Health
BioBERT
MC-BERT

Medical

General

P

R

F1

P

R

F1

Avg_F1

30.31
23.44
40.30
42.84
49.65
38.42

30.11
47.33
39.90
42.60
49.43
38.08

30.21
31.35
39.75
42.72
49.54
38.25

28.07
37.22
35.72
38.75
36.00
43.92

27.86
42.57
36.33
37.56
36.44
43.74

27.96
39.72
36.02
38.15
36.22
43.83

29.09
35.54
37.89
40.44
42.88
41.04

50.40
53.09
47.06
44.91

50.27
50.83
46.87
44.72

50.33
51.94
46.96
44.81

33.66
39.70
32.22
32.76

31.36
40.88
29.20
29.99

32.47
40.28
30.64
31.31

41.40
46.11
38.80
38.06

Table 5
Evaluation results of bilingual bitext retrieval on Mongolian-Chinese and Korean-Chinese datasets across medical and general
domains.
Model

Teacher

Mongolian-Chinese
Medical

mBERT
mBERT+W
XLM-Align
InfoXLM
DAP_cls
DAP_avg
AoE
IMASCL
mKD
MsKD
CLWKD
CLWKD
CLWKD
CLWKD
CLWKD_S

mE5
MedBERT
MedBERT
MedBERT
ERNIE-Health
BioBERT
MC-BERT
MedBERT

Korean-Chinese
General

Medical

General

s2t

t2s

s2t

t2s

s2t

t2s

s2t

t2s

Avg_s2t

Avg_t2s

–
10.63
15.09
16.04
70.61
69.66
33.49
24.83
77.47
73.14
81.13
76.88
14.56
72.16
74.52

–
8.92
14.24
15.47
69.19
68.72
36.42
27.25
78.26
74.23
79.24
75.94
12.13
67.45
75.47

–
16.83
27.14
26.13
65.45
64.47
70.67
31.90
66.43
65.44
69.66
66.74
–
53.88
66.26

–
10.89
24.12
25.53
65.69
64.96
74.40
35.74
67.42
65.93
70.63
63.10
–
50.97
65.04

12.77
15.56
17.00
19.00
75.84
73.44
38.30
83.74
85.83
82.00
90.33
76.83
60.50
84.66
84.5

10.83
14.30
15.00
16.50
74.15
71.83
40.83
88.09
83.33
80.5
89.83
72.00
57.00
84.16
82.5

14.00
16.83
20.21
15.96
68.59
67.65
53.72
73.37
48.60
46.3
51.34
35.24
37.43
42.91
47.90

12.50
10.89
17.02
20.74
67.29
64.82
54.50
77.33
47.10
45.10
49.85
33.97
34.92
39.92
46.80

13.39
14.96
19.86
19.28
70.12
68.81
49.05
53.46
69.58
66.72
73.12
63.92
37.50
63.40
68.30

11.67
11.25
17.06
19.56
69.08
67.58
51.54
57.10
69.03
66.44
72.39
61.25
34.68
60.63
67.45

Mongolian-Chinese and Korean-Chinese language pairs in the medical,
general, legal, and educational domains.
Compared with classic multilingual PLM models, Tables 5 and 6
show that CLWKD signiﬁcantly improves both Avg_s2t and Avg_t2s
in the medical and general domains for both Mongolian-Chinese and
Korean-Chinese language pairs, as well as in the legal and educational
domains for Mongolian-Chinese, compared with models such as mBERT,
mBERT+W, XLM-Align, and InfoXLM. This ﬁnding indicates that multilingual models trained on large-scale general-domain corpora, when
ﬁne-tuned with only a small amount of domain-speciﬁc data in lowresource settings, struggle to achieve good domain-speciﬁc sentencelevel semantic alignment. Although mBERT+W shows improvements
in word-level alignment, its mapping matrix 𝑊 is constructed based
on general-domain corpora, with the optimization objective focused on

word alignment, which limits its performance on sentence-level semantic alignment tasks for speciﬁc domains.
Compared with the recent sentence embedding semantic alignment
models DAP and AoE, Table 5 shows that CLWKD improves the retrieval accuracy of Avg_s2t and Avg_t2s by 2.99 % and 3.31 %, respectively, when compared with DAP and by 24.07 % and 20.85 %, respectively, when compared with AoE, in the medical and general domains
for both language pairs. Notably, CLWKD shows a particularly signiﬁcant improvement in the medical domain compared with AoE, whereas
the advantage in the general domain is relatively smaller, indicating
its greater advantage under limited domain data conditions. Furthermore, as shown in Table 6, in the legal domain, owing to the relatively
large scale of the Mongolian-Chinese legal dataset, AoE’s performance
is close to that of CLWKD, demonstrating some competitiveness but also
12

Neural Networks 194 (2026) 108114

Y. Wang et al.

Table 6
Evaluation results of bilingual bitext retrieval on Mongolian-Chinese datasets across the law and
education domains.
Model

mBERT+W
XLM-Align
InfoXLM
DAP_cls
DAP_avg
AoE
IMASCL
mKD
MsKD
CLWKD
CLWKD
CLWKD
CLWKD
CLWKD

Teacher

mE5
Lawformer/TAL-EduBERT
Lawformer/TAL-EduBERT
Lawformer/TAL-EduBERT
CKIP BERT
LegalRoBERTa
RoBERTa
Zh-BERT

Law

Education

s2t

t2s

s2t

t2s

Avg_s2t

Avg_t2s

6.00
20.00
16.50
74.20
73.21
86.05
26.47
80.10
76.80
87.00
32.00
85.90
81.7
70.02

9.50
21.30
17.45
77.13
76.90
84.20
25.36
79.20
73.70
87.70
33.00
84.30
80.2
69.13

12.43
37.27
34.55
50.96
50.17
50.76
24.82
48.89
47.66
50.63
–
–
50.12
35.38

10.89
33.64
31.82
51.44
50.25
53.75
22.54
44.71
43.98
51.47
–
–
48.64
31.94

9.21
28.63
25.525
62.58
61.69
68.40
25.64
64.49
62.23
68.81
–
–
65.91
52.7

10.19
27.47
24.63
64.28
63.57
68.97
23.95
61.95
58.84
69.58
–
–
64.42
50.53

reﬂecting its sensitivity to the data scale. Finally, as shown in Table 6,
CLWKD outperforms DAP and AoE by 6.23 % and 5.3 %, respectively, in
Avg_s2t, and by 0.41 % and 0.61 %, respectively, in Avg_t2s, in the legal
and educational domains. These results demonstrate that the dual-stage
training strategy employed by CLWKD provides signiﬁcant advantages
in low-resource domain tasks.
Compared with cross-lingual knowledge distillation models, particularly the recently proposed IMASCL method, Tables 5 and 6 show
that CLWKD achieves signiﬁcantly higher performance across three
Mongolian-Chinese domain datasets. IMASCL primarily guides the student model to learn cross-lingual semantic relations by aligning sentence similarity structures from the teacher model; however, due to
the substantial syntactic and morphological diﬀerences between Mongolian and Chinese, relying solely on similarity alignment fails to capture
the complex semantic mappings between the two languages. Moreover,
we observed that IMASCL heavily relies on sentence embedding-based
PLMs. When replacing the teacher model from mE56 to mBERT, the performance drop became more pronounced, as shown in the comparison
experiments under the 5.8 high-resource setting. This reliance makes
IMASCL less suitable for low-resource domain scenarios, where it is typically necessary to leverage both sentence-level and word-level alignment data to compensate for data scarcity. Compared to mKD, Tables 5
and 6 show that CLWKD, with MedBERT as the teacher model, improves
Avg_s2t and Avg_t2s by 3.53 % and 3.36 %, respectively, in the medical
and general domains for both language pairs. In the Mongolian-Chinese
legal and educational domains, with Lawformer and TAL-EduBERT as
teacher models, Avg_s2t and Avg_t2s improve by 4.32 % and 7.63 %, respectively. These results indicate that the cross-lingual mapping matrix
𝑊 , trained on a general-domain dataset, not only enhances the model’s
performance in speciﬁc domains but also signiﬁcantly improves its applicability and transferability in broader tasks.
Compared with the recent cross-lingual knowledge distillation compression model MsKD, Tables 5 and 6 show that the compressed
CLWKD_S, with MedBERT as the teacher model, improves Avg_s2t and
Avg_t2s by 1.58 % and 1.01 %, respectively, in the medical and general
domains for both language pairs. These results validate the eﬀectiveness
and robustness of the “cross-lingual mapping matrix + cross-lingual
knowledge distillation” dual-stage strategy in small model scenarios,
demonstrating that this method retains strong cross-lingual semantic
transfer capabilities even in parameter-limited compressed settings.
Impact of Diﬀerent Teacher Models on CLWKD. In the medical
domain, CLWKD performs best in the word alignment task when ERNIE-

Health is used as the teacher model, whereas MedBERT achieves better
results in the sentence retrieval task. During pre-training, ERNIE-Health
introduces an entity-level masking strategy that masks key medical entities such as disease names, medications, and symptoms. This strategy
guides the model to focus on the word-level representation and semantic boundary recognition of medical terms, thereby enabling more targeted transfer of entity-level semantic information to the student model
during knowledge distillation. As a result, CLWKD performs best in the
word alignment task when using ERNIE-Health as the teacher model. In
contrast, MedBERT is pre-trained on large-scale clinical text, including
numerous clinical sentences, physician notes, and patient complaints. Its
training objectives include random token masking and sentence order
prediction, which help enhance the model’s ability to capture sentencelevel semantic structures. Therefore, MedBERT is better at modeling
contextual logic and domain-speciﬁc concepts at the sentence level,
and achieves better performance in the sentence retrieval task within
the CLWKD framework. Both models are pre-trained on large-scale Chinese medical corpora, giving them a signiﬁcant advantage in semantic transfer for the medical domain. In contrast, although BioBERT is
also a model for the medical domain, its training data mainly consist
of English text, resulting in weaker performance on Mongolian-Chinese
and Korean-Chinese parallel corpora. However, in the model generalization experiments in Section 5.8, it performs well on the high-resource
English-Chinese dataset, indicating that its transfer capability is better
suited to languages that are closer or have suﬃcient resources.
In the legal domain, Tables 3 and 6 show that LegalRoBERTa and
Lawformer, with deep pretraining on Chinese legal texts, signiﬁcantly
outperform other models. The rich legal knowledge embedded in these
models is eﬀectively transferred to low-resource languages through
cross-lingual distillation. In the educational domain, TAL-EduBERT also
helps CLWKD achieve optimal performance due to its task alignment
and specialized training. In contrast, CKIP-BERT, which is trained only
on Chinese legal texts, performs poorly in distillation due to the limited data scale and diversity. General models such as RoBERTa and ZhBERT also show a signiﬁcant decrease in performance on specialized domain datasets. These results suggest that the match between the teacher
model’s language coverage and domain adaptability directly determines
the eﬀectiveness of knowledge transfer and is a key factor inﬂuencing
cross-lingual distillation performance.
Impact of Domain Data Characteristics on Model Transfer Alignment Capability. We identiﬁed that, in addition to the model architecture and teacher model, the language structure and expression style of
diﬀerent domain data signiﬁcantly aﬀect cross-lingual sentence alignment performance. Taking the legal domain as an example, this type of
data primarily consists of question-and-answer-style legal documents,

6 https://huggingface.co/intﬂoat/multilingual-e5-large

13

Neural Networks 194 (2026) 108114

Y. Wang et al.

Table 7
Evaluation results for NER on the medical and legal datasets.
Model

mBERT
mBERT-BiGRU
mBERT-BiLSTM
DAP_cls
AoE
mKD
MsKD
CLWKD (Stage 1)

Medical

cross-lingual semantic capturing ability, making it more suitable for
macrolevel semantic modeling in sentence-level alignment tasks.

Law

P

R

F1

P

R

F1

Avg_F1

60.90
61.86
59.34
71.11
70.18
70.46
66.9
70.79

60.84
59.20
58.91
69.39
68.35
68.86
63.14
69.71

60.87
60.50
59.12
70.24
69.52
69.65
64.97
70.25

50.29
52.26
49.15
55.48
58.41
55.30
50.82
60.36

50.82
51.33
50.86
56.44
57.61
59.05
52.76
58.94

50.55
51.79
49.99
55.96
58.01
57.11
51.77
59.64

55.71
56.15
54.56
63.10
63.63
63.38
58.37
64.95

5. Analysis
5.1. Diﬀerent word segmentation methods for cross-lingual semantic
mapping
To alleviate the data sparsity problem, this study incorporates the
morphological characteristics of agglutinative languages and adopts a
morphological decomposition approach. Table 8 presents experimental
results on Mongolian as a representative agglutinative language. In the
table, “Root” denotes retaining only the root form, “Seg” refers to segmenting the aﬃxes, and “Cut” indicates directly removing the aﬃxes.
Table 8 shows that the best results are obtained by removing aﬃxes,
regardless of whether the method is weakly supervised or unsupervised.
In the weakly supervised experiments, removing aﬃxes yielded an average F1 score that was 3.8 % higher than that when segmenting aﬃxes
and 17.67 % higher than that when retaining only the root. The analysis
revealed that when only the root is retained, the word alignment accuracy when fast_align is used is relatively low, and the average similarity
between words during training is also low, resulting in a lower alignment rate in the vector space. Although the root retains the most basic
information of the word, it is diﬃcult to align its meaning with Chinese
in context, and the semantic information is still insuﬃcient.
In unsupervised learning, when only the root is retained, the model
often encounters issues such as gradient vanishing or gradient explosion. Despite the root retaining the basic information of the word, the
lack of contextual information makes it diﬃcult to express the semantics when aligning with Chinese. In practice, even though attempts have
been made to mitigate these issues by adding thresholds when training
the model with the root, the results are still unsatisfactory. These ﬁndings further validate the challenges of ﬁne-tuning GAN networks with
small samples under unsupervised conditions.

which have clear sentence structures and a high proportion of general
vocabulary. The language structure is closer to that of general-domain
corpora, making it more conducive to the transfer application of the
general-domain mapping matrix, thus enabling CLWKD to perform relatively stably in this domain. The data in the educational domain are
obtained from abstracts of master’s and doctoral theses in education
at Inner Mongolia Normal University. The overall structure is highly
consistent, and the themes are concentrated. Although a random sentence selection strategy was used during training to increase sample
diversity, the strong semantic similarity and thematic consistency between the texts limited the model’s ability to recognize semantic differences between sentences. In the medical domain, the dataset used
is the Mongolian-Chinese medical domain parallel terminology dataset,
which is highly standardized and specialized in terms of terminology;
this helps the model align speciﬁc semantic units, leading to superior
performance in this domain.
These results indicate that diﬀerences in sentence structure and semantic span of the corpus have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on sentence-level semantic modeling capability. CLWKD performs better on domain corpora
with higher degrees of structural and terminological consistency.
4.5. Cross-lingual named entity recognition

5.2. Ablation experiments for cross-lingual semantic mapping

To evaluate the model’s performance on cross-lingual named entity recognition tasks, we conducted an experimental analysis using
Mongolian-Chinese medical and legal domain datasets. First, we ﬁnetuned the cross-lingual alignment model via the CCKS 2020 Chinese medical named entity recognition dataset. We then incorporated
cross-lingual prompting techniques, where Chinese prompt information
guided the entity recognition process for Mongolian medical and legal
domain texts, followed by further training and testing. We believe that
if the model has already developed strong Mongolian-Chinese semantic
alignment during pretraining, the Chinese prompts can provide clear semantic cues for low-resource languages, thereby signiﬁcantly improving
recognition performance.
As shown in Table 7, CLWKD (Stage 1) achieved average F1 improvements of 9.23 %, 8.80 %, and 10.39 % in entity recognition tasks
across the two domains compared with multilingual baseline models
(mBERT, mBERT-BiGRU, and mBERT-BiLSTM). Compared with the AoE
model, CLWKD achieved a 1.32 % average F1 improvement; compared
with the traditional knowledge distillation model mKD, the improvement was 1.56 %. Although DAP performed worse than did CLWKD sentence retrieval tasks, it showed strong competitiveness in entity recognition tasks. This is especially evident on medical datasets. Its strategy
of enhancing language unit mapping through subword alignment helps
improve the model’s sensitivity to ﬁne-grained entities. We analyze this
phenomenon further in Section 5.6.
Overall, the multigranularity mapping matrix generated in Stage 1 of
CLWKD (pretrained model + mapping structure) demonstrates stronger
representational capacity in cross-lingual word alignment and entity
recognition tasks, reﬂecting its signiﬁcant advantage in ﬁne-grained
semantic alignment. In contrast, Stage 2 exhibits greater stability and

The purpose of this experiment was to conduct an ablation analysis
to evaluate the contributions of diﬀerent modules in the ﬁrst stage of the
model. Speciﬁcally, we set the weights of the model’s pre-trained generator (Pre_Mapping), optimized mapping (Opt_mapping), training threshold (train_threshold), and testing threshold (test_threshold) to zero and
then compared the performance with that of the original model. Table 9
presents the results of the ablation study on cross-lingual mapping conducted on the Mongolian-Chinese general-domain dataset.
As shown in the 4th row of Table 9, the Opt_mapping module plays
a crucial role in the model; removing Opt_mapping resulted in a direct
decrease in the F1 score of 33.13 %. The 5th row of Table 9 indicates
that the pre-trained generator also has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the overall model. When this module was removed, the F1 score decreased by
3.83 % on the evaluation task. Pre-training the generator not only stabilizes the training process of the GAN but also enhances the overall
model performance. The 6th row of the table shows that removing the
training threshold led to a decrease of 2.55 % in the F1 score, whereas
Table 8
Diﬀerent word slicing methods.
Model

CLWKD_SVD_Cut
CLWKD_GD_Cut
CLWKD_SVD_Root
CLWKD_GD_Root
CLWKD_SVD_Seg
CLWKD_GD_Seg
14

Weakly Supervised

Unsupervised

P

R

F1

P

R

F1

68.25
71.96
36.49
53.70
60.26
63.46

57.56
60.00
40.80
54.34
57.58
59.42

62.45
65.43
38.52
54.02
58.89
61.38

–
47.80
–
–
–
35.15

–
43.01
–
–
–
32.48

–
45.28
–
–
–
33.76

Neural Networks 194 (2026) 108114

Y. Wang et al.

Table 9
Ablation analysis of cross-lingual mapping.

general datasets, respectively. This highlights the crucial role of the bottleneck layer in preserving the model’s semantic integrity.

Model

P

R

F1

Baseline
Full system
- Opt_mapping
- Pre_Mapping
- train_threshold
- test_threshold

54.97
71.96
34.18
59.62
60.62
70.88

59.05
60.00
31.88
63.74
65.30
58.19

56.94
65.43
32.30
61.61
62.88
63.91

5.4. Impact of dataset size
The impact of training dataset size on the performance of unsupervised cross-lingual mapping. To improve model performance, we
attempted to train the GAN with more data. When 360,000 MongolianChinese sentence pairs were used, we observed increases in both unsupervised evaluation metrics, as shown in Fig. 6. This ﬁnding indicates that unsupervised training beneﬁts from larger datasets. However, when the alignment matrix was optimized with 360,000 sentence pairs, the highest alignment accuracy achieved was 52 %. In contrast, using 67,000 sentence pairs yielded an alignment accuracy of
58 %. Neither approach matched the eﬀectiveness of the alignment
achieved with the 67,000 sentence pairs when adversarial training and
matrix optimization were applied. Our analysis revealed that the quality of the 360,000 Mongolian-Chinese sentences was not high; many
contained nonstandard characters, and the Latin transliteration was
not manually preprocessed. This highlights the importance of data
quality.
Impact of Training Data Size on Cross-lingual Knowledge Distillation Performance. As shown in Fig. 7, with increasing data size, the
model’s retrieval accuracy in both the s2t and t2s directions improves
signiﬁcantly. The convergence trend shows that models with larger data
sizes (e.g., s2t_15, s2t_20) quickly improve in the ﬁrst 20 epochs and
converge earlier. However, models with smaller data sizes struggle to
eﬀectively learn semantic alignment features, even when trained for
100 epochs. We found that medium-sized datasets (e.g., s2t_8, s2t_10)
already achieve near-optimal performance in both retrieval directions,
and the training process is stable and reliable; this indicates that in practical applications, large-scale datasets are not necessary to achieve eﬃcient and eﬀective knowledge distillation.

removing the testing threshold resulted in a 1.52 % decrease. This suggests that setting thresholds is critical for model performance, as it helps
ﬁlter out noise or incorrect correspondences, retaining only the correct
correspondences.
5.3. Ablation analysis of cross-lingual knowledge distillation
The ablation study included experiments that removed the crosslanguage mapping matrix W from CLWKD, examined the eﬀects of the
order of mapping and pooling, compared average pooling and [CLS]
pooling results, and analyzed the impact of removing the bottleneck
layer from the compressed CLWKD_S. During model compression, the
mapping matrix was not used, as CLWKD_S was initialized with the bottleneck layer and embedding layer from CLWKD. Table 10 presents the
results of cross-lingual knowledge distillation experiments conducted on
the Mongolian-Chinese medical and general-domain datasets.
When training the CLWKD model using only domain-speciﬁc data,
the limited amount of such data led to overﬁtting on both the medical
and general-domain test sets. This ﬁnding indicates that the data constraints hinder the model’s ability to learn broadly applicable features,
thereby reducing its performance across diﬀerent tasks and domains.
Table 10 shows that removing the general domain cross-language
mapping matrix from CLWKD resulted in decreases of 2.47 % and 0.17 %
on the s2t and t2s tasks, respectively, on the medical dataset and decreases of 1.22 % and 1.7 %, respectively, on the general dataset. This
result highlights the signiﬁcant role of the cross-language mapping matrix W in enhancing the model’s domain alignment performance.
Pooling after mapping (i.e., [CLS] pooling) led to a 1.93 % average
decrease in performance across both datasets compared with mapping
after pooling. This suggests that mapping ﬁrst retains ﬁne-grained relationships between word embeddings, thereby enhancing sentence alignment performance through preserved word alignment capabilities.
Additionally, using CLS pooling after mapping outperforms average
pooling by an average of 0.77 % on the sentence retrieval tasks across
the two datasets. These results demonstrate that [CLS] pooling is more
eﬀective in capturing sentence-level semantic information and improving performance in cross-language tasks.
Removing the bottleneck layer from CLWKD_S led to a signiﬁcant
drop in the model’s cross-lingual sentence-level semantic alignment performance, with reductions of 8.02 % and 21.96 % on the medical and

5.5. Data augmentation
This section explores two data augmentation methods to alleviate the
“lack of parallel corpora” problem. We introduced two data augmentation strategies, back-translation (BT) and machine translation (MT),
on the training set of the Mongolian-Chinese medical dataset. Backtranslation generates semantically equivalent but diversely expressed
sentence pairs by translating Chinese sentences into Mongolian and then
back to Chinese. Machine translation involves translating the CCKS Chi-

Table 10
Ablation analysis of cross-lingual knowledge distillation. OVF stands for overﬁtting.
Model

CLWKD (MMCPT)
CLWKD (MMCPT)
CLWKD-W
CLWKD
CLWKD
CLWKD_S
CLWKD_S -bottle
CLWKD(all)

Mapping or Pooling

Mapping+Average Pooling
Mapping+CLS Pooling
Mapping+CLS Pooling
CLS Pooling
Mapping+Average Pooling
–
–
Mapping+CLS Pooling

MMCPT

CWMT

s2t

t2s

s2t

t2s

OVF
OVF
78.66
78.13
79.71
74.52
67.45
81.13

OVF
OVF
79.07
78.54
78.77
75.47
66.50
79.24

OVF
OVF
68.44
67.63
68.44
66.26
44.66
69.66

OVF
OVF
68.93
68.63
70.63
65.04
42.71
70.63

Fig. 6. Impact of training data size on the performance of unsupervised crosslingual mapping, where the number of sentence pairs is measured in thousands.
15

Neural Networks 194 (2026) 108114

Y. Wang et al.

Table 11
Case study analysis of cross-lingual NER.
Context

SINJI TEMDEG : D0T0R BACIMDAHV, VCAGARDAHV,
HEBTEBEL B0SHV DVR_A UGEI, CISVN DARVLTA NI D00R_A,
S0LIYARAJV GUYUHU JERGE SINJI-TEY.

Answer

D0T0R BACIMDAHV, VCAGARDAHV, CISVN DARVLTA NI
D00R_A, S0LIYARAJV GUYUHU

CLWKD

CISVN DARVLTA NI D00R_A, D0T0R BACIMDAHV,
S0LIYARAJV GUYUHU

DAP

CISVN DARVLTA NI D00R_A, D0T0R BACIMDAHV,
S0LIYARAJV GUYUHU

MsKD

CISVN DARVLTA NI D00R_A, D0T0R BACIMDAHV

5.6. Case study
To explore the generalizability of CLWKD, we conducted a case study
using neurology case data. The training set did not include neurology
case data and consisted mainly of inpatient data from the respiratory
department.
Table 11 shows that the two models trained with token alignment
information, CLWKD and DAP, were able to identify the entity “S0LIYARAJV GUYUHU” (translated as “crazy running”), which was not
present in the training set, whereas the other models failed to do so.
This further demonstrates that token alignment models have a stronger
ability to handle the ﬁne-grained features and patterns of language. By
breaking words into smaller token units, token alignment models can
better capture subtle diﬀerences and details in language, enabling recognition of even unseen vocabulary through the combination of existing
tokens. This ﬁne-grained alignment mechanism is more eﬀective at addressing complex morphological phenomena, such as aﬃx changes and
word form reduction, thus improving the accuracy of entity recognition.
To further validate this performance, experiments were conducted
on a general data test set. When only word roots were used, the performances for the bitext retrieval tasks, s2t and t2s, were 32.03 % and
28.64 %, respectively. These results indicate that although stemming reduces vocabulary diversity, the model is still able to maintain high alignment and retrieval performance in bitext retrieval tasks. This suggests
that token alignment models, even in the face of reduced vocabulary
diversity, possess excellent generalization and semantic understanding
capabilities, eﬀectively enhancing their performance in handling complex language tasks.

Fig. 7. Impact of training data size on the performance of cross-lingual knowledge distillation, where the number following the underscore (“_”) indicates the
corresponding number of training sentence pairs (in thousands).

nese medical domain text into Mongolian, generating sentence pairs
with actual semantic context.
The experimental results, shown in Fig. 8, indicate that both augmentation strategies outperform the original terminology data (OR), effectively improving the model’s training and alignment performance.
Among them, back-translation (BT_s2t and BT_t2s) shows the best performance in terms of both convergence speed and ﬁnal accuracy, with a
signiﬁcant improvement, especially between epochs 10–40. This demonstrates that by introducing structurally diverse but semantically consistent training samples, back-translation eﬀectively enhances the model’s
robustness to cross-lingual expression diﬀerences. Machine translation
(MT_s2t and MT_t2s) also outperforms the original data group, indicating its ability to expand data diversity and improve the model’s generalizability; however, its performance improvement is slightly lower
than that of back-translation, which may be attributed to the following
reasons. First, the translation corpus comes from real medical sentences,
whereas the original training data consists of terminology-based parallel
sentences, which diﬀer in sentence structure style; second, the complete
medical sentence structure is more complex and semantically noisy, and
machine translation quality ﬂuctuates, making it prone to errors or amplifying noise, thus aﬀecting the augmentation eﬀect.

5.7. Visualization analysis
The blue dots represent high-resource Chinese medical domain characters, whereas the red dots represent low-resource Mongolian medical
domain words. In Fig. 9(a), which presents the results of the mBERT
model, while the red dots form noticeable clusters, these clusters are
relatively isolated and not closely related to the blue dots. In Fig. 9(b),
the DAP model displays a more uniform distribution of points, indicating that the model performed a more extensive dispersion of word
embeddings. However, the lack of distinct clustering and strong alignment eﬀects suggests that the model may have limitations in capturing
semantic features and performing cross-lingual alignment. In Fig. 9(c),
the CLWKD model shows more pronounced clustering, indicating that
the model can, to some extent, group semantically similar words together, especially frequently used or contextually similar words. For
low-resource languages, this clustering may suggest that the model
achieves better semantic alignment for certain vocabularies.
5.8. Performance analysis on high-resource datasets

Fig. 8. Impact of back-translation and machine translation on MongolianChinese sentence alignment performance. The evaluation metrics are sentence
retrieval accuracies in both the s2t and t2s directions across diﬀerent epochs.

To validate the model’s performance on high-resource data, we used
Chinese-English general data for the ﬁrst stage of cross-lingual mapping
16

Neural Networks 194 (2026) 108114

Y. Wang et al.

Fig. 9. Visualization of 200 pairs of Mongolian-Chinese medical parallel terms.

Table 12
Cross-lingual sentence retrieval results on the EnglishChinese medical domain. The highest values are highlighted in bold, and the second-highest values are underlined.
Model

DAP_cls
AoE
IMASCL
IMASCL
CLWKD
CLWKD
CLWKD
CLWKD

Teacher

–
–
mBERT
mE5
MedBERT
ERNIE-Health
BioBERT
MC-BERT

strategies are employed, including agglutinative language morphological decomposition, shared multilingual PLM embedding layers, pretraining the generator, gradient optimization of the mapping matrix, and
threshold setting, to learn the multi-granularity cross-lingual mapping
matrix for the general domain in an unsupervised and weakly supervised manner. In the second stage, the learned general-domain matrix is
applied to cross-lingual knowledge distillation, enhancing domain data
and semantic space alignment, thus transferring high-resource domain
knowledge to low-resource models while also performing model compression. The experimental results show that CLWKD achieves excellent performance in three cross-lingual tasks (cross-lingual word alignment, dual-text retrieval, and cross-lingual named entity recognition)
across Mongolian-Chinese and Korean-Chinese language pairs, covering
multiple domains, including medical, legal, and educational. Compared
with strong baseline models, CLWKD shows improvements in crosslingual word alignment tasks. In the Mongolian-Chinese legal and educational domains, the average F1 score increases by 0.14-9.26 %, and in
the Korean-Chinese medical and general domains, it improves by 3.2317.03 %. In dual-text retrieval tasks, CLWKD improves the average F1
score by 0.41-7.12 % in the medical and general domains for both language pairs and by 1.58-24 % in the Mongolian-Chinese legal and educational domains. In the Mongolian-Chinese medical and legal named
entity recognition tasks, the average F1 score improves by 1.32-6.57 %.
The CLWKD_S model, which is compressed via parameter recycling and
bottleneck layer strategies, is also highly competitive compared with
the baseline. Additionally, experimental analysis shows that, in agglutinative languages with complex morphology, combining shared multilingual PLM embedding layers and token alignment task training helps
improve the model’s generalization ability.
Limitations Although our approach is eﬃcient and scalable, we
have not yet leveraged high-resource, large-scale medical domain models as teacher models to transfer their knowledge to low-resource models and perform parallel compression owing to computational resource
constraints.

Medical Dataset
s2t

t2s

93.40
95.10
88.22
96.20
73.05
90.00
95.72
89.42

90.20
93.60
87.83
96.77
73.24
89.6
92.67
88.00

training and Chinese-English medical domain data for the second stage
of cross-lingual knowledge distillation. In the general domain, we selected 20,000 Chinese-English sentence pairs from the OPUS-Europarl
dataset.7 In the medical domain, we used 10,000 sentence pairs from
the New England Journal of Medicine Chinese-English medical paper
dataset8 . Both datasets were split into training, validation, and test sets
at an 8:1:1 ratio.
The experimental results, shown in Table 12, demonstrate that
CLWKD is highly competitive compared with recent sentence-level semantic alignment models such as DAP, AoE, and IMASCL in the crosslingual sentence alignment task. This validates the model’s adaptability and generalizability in diﬀerent resource scenarios, providing strong
theoretical and experimental support for low-resource language transfer. As shown in Table 12, in the Chinese-English cross-lingual task,
BioBERT, as a teacher model pretrained on English medical data, significantly outperforms other models, indicating its stronger transfer capability in this language direction. This result also reaﬃrms the conclusion
in Section 4.4 that the choice of teacher model has a signiﬁcant eﬀect
on the eﬀectiveness of cross-lingual knowledge distillation.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Yurong Wang: Writing – original draft, Software, Methodology; Min
Lin: Writing – review & editing; Qitu Hu: Investigation, Data curation;
Shuangcheng Bai: Supervision; Yanling Li: Supervision; Longjie Bao:
Resources, Data curation.

6. Conclusions
In this paper, a cross-lingual multi-granularity semantic alignment
model CLWKD for low-resource languages is proposed, which can be
used for both word-level and sentence-level cross-lingual semantic alignment tasks. CLWKD is divided into two stages. In the ﬁrst stage, multiple

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence
the work reported in this paper.

7

https://object.pouta.csc.ﬁ/OPUS-Europarl/v8/moses/en-zh.txt.zip
8 https://github.com/boxiangliu/ParaMed
17

Neural Networks 194 (2026) 108114

Y. Wang et al.

Acknowledgement

Li, J., Hou, H., Wu, J., Wang, H., & Fan, W. (2017). Impact of corpus preprocessing on Mongolian-Chinese statistical machine translation. Computer Science, 44(10),
259–264.
Li, X., & Li, J. (2024). AoE: Angle-optimized embeddings for semantic textual similarity. In L.-W. Ku, A. Martins, & V. Srikumar (Eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume 1: Long papers)
(pp. 1825–1839). Bangkok, Thailand: Association for Computational Linguistics. https:
//doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.101
Li, Y., Liu, F., Collier, N., Korhonen, A., & Vulić, I. (2022). Improving word translation via
two-stage contrastive learning. arXiv:2203.08307
Li, Z., Huang, S., Zhang, Z., Deng, Z.-H., Lou, Q., Huang, H., Jiao, J., Wei, F., Deng, W., &
Zhang, Q. (2023). Dual-alignment pre-training for cross-lingual sentence embedding.
arXiv:2305.09148
Lian, X., Jain, K., Truszkowski, J., Poupart, P., & Yu, Y. (2020). Unsupervised multilingual
alignment using wasserstein barycenter. arXiv:2002.00743
Liang, X., Gu, Z., Xie, Y., Wang, L., & Tian, Z. (2023). MUSEDA: Multilingual unsupervised and supervised embedding for domain adaption. Knowledge-Based Systems, 273,
110560.
Liu, X., Zheng, Y., Du, Z., Ding, M., Qian, Y., Yang, Z., & Tang, J. (2024). Gpt understands,
too. AI Open, 5, 208–215
Liu, Y. (2019). RoBERTa: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach.
arXiv:1907.11692
Liu, Y. (2020). Multilingual denoising pre-training for neural machine translation.
arXiv:2001.08210
Miao, Z., Wu, Q., Zhao, K., Wu, Z., & Tsuruoka, Y. (2024). Enhancing cross-lingual sentence embedding for low-resource languages with word alignment. arXiv:2404.02490
Mikolov, T., Le, Q. V., & Sutskever, I. (2013). Exploiting similarities among languages for
machine translation. arXiv:1309.4168
Park, M., Choi, S., Choi, C., Kim, J.-S., & Sohn, J.-y. (2024). Improving multi-lingual
alignment through soft contrastive learning. In Y. T. Cao, I. Papadimitriou, A. Ovalle,
M. Zampieri, F. Ferraro, & S. Swayamdipta (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 conference of the North American chapter of the association for computational linguistics: Human language technologies (volume 4: Student research workshop) (pp. 138–145). Mexico
City, Mexico: Association for Computational Linguistics. https://doi.org/10.18653/
v1/2024.naacl-srw.16
Pham, T., Le, K., & Luu, A. T. (2024). UniBridge: A uniﬁed approach to cross-lingual
transfer learning for low-resource languages. In L.-W. Ku, A. Martins, & V. Srikumar
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume 1: Long papers) (pp. 3168–3184). Bangkok, Thailand: Association for
Computational Linguistics. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.174
Rasmy, L., Xiang, Y., Xie, Z., Tao, C., & Zhi, D. (2021). Med-BERT: Pretrained contextualized embeddings on large-scale structured electronic health records for disease
prediction. NPJ Digital Medicine, 4(1), 86.
Reimers, N., & Gurevych, I. (2020). Making monolingual sentence embeddings multilingual using knowledge distillation. arXiv:2004.09813
Ren, Z., Hou, H., Jiatu, Wu, Z., Bai, T., & Lei, Y. (2019). Application of sub-character
granularity segmentation in Mongolian-Chinese neural machine translation. Journal
of Chinese Information Processing, 33(01), 85–92.
Ruder, S., Vulić, I., & Søgaard, A. (2019). A survey of cross-lingual word embedding models. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 65, 569–631.
Sanh, V. (2019). DistilBERT, a distilled version of BERT: Smaller, faster, cheaper and
lighter. arXiv:1910.01108
Schwenk, H., Chaudhary, V., Sun, S., Gong, H., & Guzmán, F. (2019). WikiMatrix: Mining
135m parallel sentences in 1620 language pairs from wikipedia. arXiv:1907.05791
Shliazhko, O., Fenogenova, A., Tikhonova, M., Mikhailov, V., Kozlova, A., & Shavrina, T.
(2022). mGPT: Few-shot learners go multilingual. arXiv:2204.07580
Sun, S., Cheng, Y., Gan, Z., & Liu, J. (2019). Patient knowledge distillation for bert model
compression. arXiv:1908.09355
Sun, Z., Yu, H., Song, X., Liu, R., Yang, Y., & Zhou, D. (2020). MobileBERT: A compact
task-agnostic bert for resource-limited devices. arXiv:2004.02984
Symeonidou, A., Sazonau, V., & Groth, P. (2019). Transfer learning for biomedical named
entity recognition with bioBERT. In Semantics (posters & demos).
Tao, Q., Xiong, Z., Han, B., Fan, X., & Li, L. (2023). A novel unsupervised approach for
cross-lingual word alignment in low isomorphic embedding spaces. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 31, 3027–3041.
Wang, R., Li, Z., Yang, J., Cao, T., Zhang, C., Yin, B., & Abdelzaher, T. (2023). Mutuallypaced knowledge distillation for cross-lingual temporal knowledge graph reasoning.
In Proceedings of the ACM web conference 2023 (pp. 2621–2632).
Wang, S. (2009). Research on Chinese-Mongolian machine translation and related technologies based on hybrid strategies. Ph.D. thesis. Inner Mongolia University.
Wang, W., Bao, H., Huang, S., Dong, L., & Wei, F. (2020). MiniLMv2: Multihead self-attention relation distillation for compressing pretrained transformers.
arXiv:2012.15828
Wang, Y. (2023). Research on cross-lingual word vector learning in Mongolian and Chinese based on BERT. Ph.d. thesis Inner Mongolia Normal University. https://doi.org/
10.27230/d.cnki.gnmsu.2022.000773
Wang, Y., Che, W., Guo, J., Liu, Y., & Liu, T. (2019). Cross-lingual BERT transformation
for zero-shot dependency parsing. arXiv:1909.06775
Xiao, C., Hu, X., Liu, Z., Tu, C., & Sun, M. (2021). Lawformer: A pre-trained language
model for chinese legal long documents. AI Open, 2, 79–84.
Xing, C., Wang, D., Liu, C., & Lin, Y. (2015). Normalized word embedding and orthogonal
transform for bilingual word translation. In Proceedings of the 2015 conference of the
North American chapter of the association for computational linguistics: Human language
technologies (pp. 1006–1011).
Xue, L. (2020). mT5: A massively multilingual pre-trained text-to-text transformer.
arXiv:2010.11934

This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (NSFC) under grant 62266033, in part by the Key
Laboratory of Inﬁnite-dimensional Hamiltonian System and Its Algorithm Application (Inner Mongolia Normal University), Ministry of Education (2023KFZD03), and in part by the Graduate Students’ Research &
Innovation Fund of Inner Mongolia Normal University (CXJJB23011).
References
Ai, X., & Huang, Z. (2024). Zero-shot cross-lingual alignment for embedding initialization. In L.-W. Ku, A. Martins, & V. Srikumar (Eds.), Findings of the association for computational linguistics: ACL 2024 (pp. 5997–6007). Bangkok, Thailand: Association for
Computational Linguistics. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.ﬁndings-acl.358
Artetxe, M., Labaka, G., & Agirre, E. (2017a). Learning bilingual word embeddings with
(almost) no bilingual data. In Proceedings of the 55th annual meeting of the association
for computational linguistics (volume 1: Long papers) (pp. 451–462).
Artetxe, M., Labaka, G., & Agirre, E. (2018). A robust self-learning method for fully unsupervised cross-lingual mappings of word embeddings. arXiv:1805.06297
Artetxe, M., Labaka, G., Agirre, E., & Cho, K. (2017b). Unsupervised neural machine translation. arXiv:1710.11041
Artetxe, M., & Schwenk, H. (2019). Massively multilingual sentence embeddings for zeroshot cross-lingual transfer and beyond. Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 7, 597–610.
Bai, X., Cao, H., Chen, K., & Zhao, T. (2019). A bilingual adversarial autoencoder for
unsupervised bilingual lexicon induction. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech,
and Language Processing, 27(10), 1639–1648.
Chi, Z., Dong, L., Wei, F., Yang, N., Singhal, S., Wang, W., Song, X., Mao, X.-L., Huang,
H., & Zhou, M. (2020). InfoXLM: An information-theoretic framework for cross-lingual
language model pre-training. arXiv:2007.07834
Chi, Z., Dong, L., Zheng, B., Huang, S., Mao, X.-L., Huang, H., & Wei, F. (2021). Improving pretrained cross-lingual language models via self-labeled word alignment.
arXiv:2106.06381
Chousa, K., Nagata, M., & Nishino, M. (2020). SpanAlign: Sentence alignment method
based on cross-language span prediction and ILP. In Proceedings of the 28th international
conference on computational linguistics (pp. 4750–4761).
Clavié, B., & Gal, K. (2019). EduBERT: Pretrained deep language models for learning analytics. https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.00690.
Conneau, A. (2019). Unsupervised cross-lingual representation learning at scale.
arXiv:1911.02116
Conneau, A., & Lample, G. (2019). Cross-lingual language model pretraining. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 32.
Conneau, A., Lample, G., Ranzato, M., Denoyer, L., & Jégou, H. (2017). Word translation
without parallel data. arXiv:1710.04087
Ding, K., Liu, W., Fang, Y., Zhao, Z., Ju, Q., & Yang, X. (2022). Multi-stage distillation
framework for cross-lingual semantic similarity matching. arXiv:2209.05869
Dyer, C., Lopez, A., Ganitkevitch, J., Weese, J., Ture, F., Blunsom, P., Setiawan, H., Eidelman, V., & Resnik, P. (2010). cdec: A decoder, alignment, and learning framework for
ﬁnite-state and context-free translation models. In Proceedings of the ACL 2010 system
demonstrations (pp. 7–12). Association for Computational Linguistics.
Feng, F., Yang, Y., Cer, D., Arivazhagan, N., & Wang, W. (2020). Language-agnostic BERT
sentence embedding. arXiv:2007.01852
Gan, Z., Li, Z., Zhang, B., Wan, J., Chen, Y., Liu, K., Zhao, J., Shi, Y., & Liu, S. (2021).
Enhance both text and label: Combination strategies for improving the generalization
ability of medical entity extraction. In Proceedings of the China conference on knowledge
graph and semantic computing (pp. 92–101). Springer, Singapore.
Ge, L., Hu, C., Ma, G., Zhang, H., & Liu, J. (2023). ProKD: An unsupervised prototypical
knowledge distillation network for zero-resource cross-lingual named entity recognition. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artiﬁcial intelligence (pp. 12818–12826).
(vol. 37).
Hou, H., Liu, Q., Wuritu, N., Murengowa, & Li, J. (2009). Mongolian word segmentation based on statistical language models. Pattern Recognition and Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
22(01), 108–112.
Hu, J., Ruder, S., Siddhant, A., Neubig, G., Firat, O., & Johnson, M. (2020). XTREME: A
massively multilingual multi-task benchmark for evaluating cross-lingual generalisation. In International conference on machine learning (pp. 4411–4421). PMLR.
Hu, L., & Xu, Y. (2024). DM-BLI: Dynamic multiple subspaces alignment for unsupervised
bilingual lexicon induction. In L.-W. Ku, A. Martins, & V. Srikumar (Eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume
1: Long papers) (pp. 2041–2052). Bangkok, Thailand: Association for Computational
Linguistics. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.112
Jiao, X., Yin, Y., Shang, L., Jiang, X., Chen, X., Li, L., Wang, F., & Liu, Q. (2019). TinyBERT:
Distilling BERT for natural language understanding. arXiv:1909.10351
Kenton, J. D. M.-W. C., & Toutanova, L. K. (2019). BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT (p. 2). (Vol. 1).
Lample, G., Conneau, A., Denoyer, L., & Ranzato, M. (2017). Unsupervised machine translation using monolingual corpora only. arXiv:1711.00043
Lan, Z. (2019). ALBERT: A lite bert for self-supervised learning of language representations. arXiv:1909.11942
Lee, J., Yoon, W., Kim, S., Kim, D., Kim, S., So, C. H., & Kang, J. (2020). BioBERT: A pretrained biomedical language representation model for biomedical text mining. Bioinformatics, 36(4), 1234–1240.
18

Neural Networks 194 (2026) 108114

Y. Wang et al.

Yang, F. (2021). Research on BERT models for clinical natural language processing in
Chinese, Master’s thesis, Peking Union Medical College. https://doi.org/10.27648/d.
cnki.gzxhu.2021.000896
Yang, X., Yun, J., Zheng, B., Liu, L., & Ban, Q. (2023). Oversea cross-lingual summarization
service in multilanguage pre-trained model through knowledge distillation. Electronics,
12(24), 5001.
Yang, Z., Xu, Z., Cui, Y., Wang, B., Lin, M., Wu, D., & Chen, Z. (2022). CINO: A chinese
minority pre-trained language model. arXiv:2202.13558
Zhang, M., Liu, Y., Luan, H., & Sun, M. (2017). Adversarial training for unsupervised
bilingual lexicon induction. In Proceedings of the 55th annual meeting of the association
for computational linguistics (volume 1: Long papers) (pp. 1959–1970).

Zhang, N., Jia, Q., Yin, K., Dong, L., Gao, F., & Hua, N. (2020). Conceptualized representation learning for chinese biomedical text mining. arXiv:2008.10813
Zhang, Z.-R., Tan, C., Huang, S., & Huang, F. (2023). VECO 2.0: Cross-lingual
language model pre-training with multi-granularity contrastive learning.
arXiv:2304.08205
Zhu, Z., Cheng, X., Chen, Z., Zhuang, X., Huang, Z., & Zou, Y. (2024). Code-switching
can be better aligners: Advancing cross-lingual SLU through representation-level and
prediction-level alignment. In L.-W. Ku, A. Martins, & V. Srikumar (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 62nd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume 2: Short
papers) (pp. 153–160). Bangkok, Thailand: Association for Computational Linguistics.
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.acl-short.15

19

