Computer Law & Security Review 52 (2024) 105904

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal
of Technology Law and Practice
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/clsr

An entity-centric approach to manage court judgments based on Natural
Language Processing
Valerio Bellandi a ,1 , Christian Bernasconi b ,1 , Fausto Lodi b ,1 , Matteo Palmonari b ,1 ,
Riccardo Pozzi b ,1 ,∗, Marco Ripamonti b ,1 , Stefano Siccardi c ,1
a

Computer Science Department, Università degli Studi di Milano, Via Celoria 18, Milan, 20122, MI, Italy

b Dipartimento di Informatica, Sistemistica e Comunicazione, Università degli Studi di Milano Bicocca, Viale Sarca, 336, Milan, 20125, MI, Italy
c Consorzio Interuniversitario Nazionale per l’Informatica, Via Ariosto, 25, Rome, 00185, RM, Italy

ARTICLE

INFO

Keywords:
Legal knowledge extraction
Semantic search
Named Entity Recognition
Zero-shot learning

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we present an entity-centric infrastructure to manage legal documents, especially court
judgments, based on the organization of a textual document repository and on the annotation of these
documents to serve a variety of downstream tasks. Documents are pre-processed and then iteratively annotated
using a set of NLP services that combine complementary approaches based on machine learning and syntactic
rules. We present a framework that has been designed to be developed and maintained in a sustainable way,
allowing for multiple services and uses of the annotated document repository and considering the scarcity of
annotated data as an intrinsic challenge for its development. The design activity is the result of a cooperative
project where a scientific team, institutional bodies, and companies appointed to implement the final system
are involved in co-design activities. We describe experiments to demonstrate the feasibility of the solution and
discuss the main challenges to scaling the system at a national level. In particular, we report the results we
obtained in annotating data with different low-resource methods and with solutions designed to combine these
approaches in a meaningful way. An essential aspect of the proposed solution is a human-in-the-loop approach
to control the output of the annotation algorithms in agreement with the organizational processes in place in
Italian courts. Based on these results we advocate for the feasibility of the proposed approach and discuss the
challenges that must be addressed to ensure the scalability and robustness of the proposed solution.

1. Introduction
Legal documents, especially court judgments and similar resolutions
such as orders, contain information that is valuable in multiple applications (from legal case retrieval to legal process analysis), for different
purposes (from the comparison with similar cases for uniform judgments to discovering trends for specific legal subjects, e.g., counting the
average maintenance in relation to economical conditions of the partners in divorces), and stakeholders (from judges to law administrators,
lawmakers, lawyers, scholars, and the general public). For the sake of
simplicity, in the rest of the paper, we will use ‘‘judgements’’ to indicate
also similar documents. Several applications, e.g., legal search engines,
are already in place, but recent advances in data management, Natural
Language Processing (NLP), and Machine Learning (ML) are dramatically transforming legal text processing, promising more powerful or
completely novel functionalities in legal applications.

References to entities such as organizations, persons, locations,
dates and money2 play an important role in these documents: the
extraction, consolidation and storage of these references in the form
of metadata and annotations can support many of current and future
applications. For example, considering entities in a faceted search
application [2] can help users retrieve legal cases they are interested
in (e.g., ‘‘find all judgments that mention the Wells Fargo bank’’) or
locate specific entities in long judgments (e.g., ‘‘find all occurrences
of Jane Smith in a judgment consisting of several pages’’); studying
the relation between maintenance and economical conditions of the
partners can be better supported by extracting all references to money
in the judgment; studying trends at the regional level can be better
supported by extracting addresses in multiple judgment. Solutions to
extract information from legal documents have in fact a long tradition
and are attracting an even increased interest [3].

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address: riccardo.pozzi@unimib.it (R. Pozzi).
All authors contributed equally.
2
In this paper we refer to the broad interpretation of ‘‘named entities’’ that is commonly used in the NLP community [1]
1

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2023.105904
Available online 31 October 2023
2212-473X/© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

V. Bellandi et al.

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105904

Fig. 1. A sketch of the result of entity extraction and knowledge consolidation. Mentions of entities described in background knowledge bases are linked (links are shown explicitly).
Mentions of the same new entities are clustered (links between the mentions and the new entities are persisted but omitted in the figure).

Many approaches have been proposed to extract abstract concepts [4] or named entities [3]. However, most of the existing approaches (see also Section 2.2) addressed only the identification and
classification of entity mentions within each document (e.g., the sequence ‘‘Ms. Jane Smith’’ refers to an entity of type ‘‘person’’), a task
known as Named Entity Recognition (NER). However, NER alone falls
short of guaranteeing certain functionalities. For instance, while NER
can identify and classify entities such as persons or organizations within
a text, it does not provide the capability to determine which of these
mentions correspond to the same entity. As a consequence, it would
not be possible to develop some of the search functionalities discussed
before (e.g., find all occurrences of Jane Smith in one or multiple
judgments). To support similar functionalities, an additional knowledge
consolidation process is required. Such a process can be realized by
assigning each entity mention an entity identifier, which represents
the entity the mention refers to. The application of this entity-centric
knowledge consolidation process to legal documents and, in particular
to court judgments, has been limited so far.
Also, most of the existing work has focused on algorithms for entity
extraction without discussing which kind of software architectures
should be developed to implement the extraction processes and manage
the data generated thereof.
The main objective of this paper is to investigate the feasibility and
implications of supporting entity-centric data enrichment and management for legal documents, focusing on court judgments, and addressing
two specific research questions.

In relation to RQ1, we propose an entity extraction approach that
supports entity-centric knowledge consolidation by exploiting background information sources that provide global, canonical, entity identifiers when possible (e.g., geographic coordinates, web identifiers
of law articles, Wikipedia webpages), and introducing novel entity
identifiers for entities not described in the background sources. While
most of the entities, especially persons and organizations, fall in the
latter case, canonical links cover 22% of persons, organizations, and
locations in the data used in our experiments. To implement this
approach, we develop and evaluate a pipeline that uses ML-based and
rule-based algorithms to identify and classify entity mentions, predict
links to canonical identifiers, and cluster mentions that are not linked
and therefore represent ‘‘novel’’ entities. The pipeline is based on
approaches proposed in previous work [5–7] but the main focus of
this paper is to provide an in-depth analysis of its performance on
court judgment data, which, to the best of our knowledge, has not
been attempted before. To this end we have developed a gold standard,
which we document in the paper; while the gold standard cannot
be shared because of data sensitivity reasons, our methodology can
be replicated on other similar datasets. The results suggest that the
maturity of NLP technologies is quite close to supporting full-fledged
entity extraction and consolidation for similar legal data. However, a
few challenges – discussed in the paper – must be addressed to deliver
solutions that can be really adopted in courts and trials at the national
level.
In relation to RQ2, we propose an architecture that is intended to
capture domain requirements collected in the context of two projects
developed in cooperation with or funded by DGSIA3 and the Ministry
of Justice. In particular, our proposal is aimed at supporting entity extraction and consolidation, explicitly considering: access to the different
information pieces that compose the enriched data (e.g., search), the
revision of the output of the algorithms in a human-in-the-loop fashion,
the addition and modification of processing components in a modular
fashion (extensibility), and the scalability of algorithm execution.
The paper is structured as follows: we begin by discussing related
work in Section 2 and the data used in our work in Section 3. In
Section 4, we describe the pipeline proposed for addressing RQ1, while
Section 5 covers the architecture proposed for addressing RQ2. Our
experiments are detailed in Section 6. Finally, we discuss conclusions
and future work in Section 7.

1. RQ1 - Can we exploit algorithms that not only find and classify
entity mentions but also consolidate the extracted information
by grouping entity mentions referring to the same entity, therefore supporting entity-centric data management in downstream
applications?
2. RQ2 - Which architectural design can ensure the scalability, extensibility, and availability of entity extraction and consolidation
processes in the context of court judgments and downstream
applications that rely on annotated documents?
In the paper, we provide a few contributions to answer these
research questions. The main idea behind our paper is exemplified in
Fig. 1. The figure depicts two fictional judgments and three background
KBs: Wikipedia, the geo-coordinate system (geocoding addresses returns points in this system), and a law database; extracted entity
mentions are highlighted in different colors depending on their type;
after knowledge consolidation, a set of entities appearing in the judgments are identified, some belong or are linked to the background KBs,
and some are new entities specific to the processed judgments.

3
The institutional body that manages the information systems of the
Ministry of Justice.

2

V. Bellandi et al.

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105904

2. Related work

extraction frameworks. In the following paragraphs, we briefly describe
recent developments related to each of these tasks regardless of their
application to the legal domain and summarize the relation between
these developments and the approaches used in our paper.

We organize the discussion about related work in three sections. In
Section 2.1, we introduce the conceptualization of entity extraction and
knowledge consolidation approaches into a set of different tasks and
discuss the latest advancements without specific reference to the legal
domain. In Section 2.2, we discuss the application of entity extraction
and knowledge consolidation approaches in the legal domain. In Section 2.3, we discuss architectures proposed to support these approaches
in the legal domain.

NER. Several approaches based on rules or machine learning with
manually engineered features have been developed and are still deemed
to be helpful in practice for some types of entities, which are named
using a set of known patterns [11]. However, latest NER approaches
exploit deep learning methods possibly combined with conditional
random fields (CRFs) [11]. Word and character embeddings provide
valuable features to support a NER classifier, which performs a sequence tagging task. The leading approach on the CoNLL2003 NER
benchmark for the English language obtains an F1 score of 94.6 using a mix of character-based, contextualized, and non-contextualized
embeddings [12].
However, recent work showed BERT models [13] outperform CRFs
on Italian NER datasets considering the types ‘‘person’’, ‘‘organization’’,
and ‘‘location’’ [14]. In our work, we test the combination of existing NER models for the Italian language based on rules, CRF, and
contextualized word embeddings, pre-trained and fine-tuned.

2.1. Entity extraction and knowledge consolidation: Tasks and approaches
In the literature, the extraction of entity mentions from text and
the subsequent knowledge consolidation process are often conceptually
divided into different tasks [8].
The Named Entity Recognition (NER) task consists of the identification of the sequences of tokens that correspond to entity mentions
(spans) and the classification of these mentions into a predefined
set of classes (e.g., ‘‘person’’, ‘‘location’’, and ‘‘organization’’); most
recent approaches treat the task as a supervised sequential classification
problem, often leveraging pre-trained large language models as feature
extractors.
Several approaches consider also the problem of consolidating the
extracted entity mentions to identify which ones refer to the same
entities, which we refer to as the knowledge consolidation problem.
Some approaches propose to consolidate knowledge by clustering the
entities found [9] without exploiting any background Knowledge Base
(KB), while most of the approaches exploit background KBs [5–7]
to improve data integration by interlinking documents referring to
entities described in these KBs. The latter approaches have also the
advantage that they make it possible to exploit the vast amount of
knowledge stored in KBs to further enrich the data (for example,
entities in Wikipedia are classified into categories). In our work, we
choose this second KB-supported approach and use the conceptual
framework proposed in Knowledge Base Population track of the Text
Analysis Conference’s (TAC-KBP)4 [8]. In this framework, three subtasks are considered: Named Entity Linking, NIL Prediction, and NIL
Clustering. Despite the terminology may slightly change, these tasks are
implemented in similar approaches to knowledge consolidation [5–7].
Named Entity Linking (NEL) consists of linking entity mentions to
their corresponding entities in the KB, e.g., the mention ‘‘Wells Fargo’’
corresponds to the Wikipedia entity described in the page https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wells_Fargo (all the examples here are referred
to Fig. 1). It is possible, however, that an entity mention refers to
an entity that is not present in the KB, in which case, it should be
tagged as NIL (‘‘Not in Lexicon’’). This task consisting of predicting
whether an entity is NIL, sometimes interpreted as sub-task of NEL,
is frequently referred to as NIL Prediction; for example, NIL prediction
should tell for all mentions which should be linked, e.g., each mention
of ‘‘Cityville’’, and which should not and tagged as NIL, e.g., each
mention of ‘‘Jane Smith’’. While in KB-supported consolidation all
mentions linked to some KB entity (e.g., the mentions of ‘‘Cityville’’)
are implicitly clustered, NIL entity mentions (e.g., the mentions of
‘‘Jane Smith’’) are not; therefore a final task consists of NIL Clustering,
i.e., clustering all the NIL entity mentions that refer to the same entity.
In the example shown in Fig. 1, this KB-supported knowledge consolidation process is expected to extract mentions of five entities described
in two different KBs (Wikipedia and a database of Law Articles) and
mentions of eight new entities. It is worth observing that while NIL
Prediction and NIL Clustering received less attention than NEL until a
while ago (e.g., see [10]), the interest in these tasks has significantly
increased in recent work [6,7], because of their centrality in entity

4

NEL. In the last decade, techniques for NEL began using representation
learning to obtain dense representations of mentions (in their context)
and entity descriptions and compute their similarity scores [15,16].
Attention mechanisms and transformers [17] have improved techniques
based on dense representations, leading to the emergence of the biencoder and cross-encoder paradigms for dense-retrieval and candidate
re-ranking, respectively. These paradigms have been deeply explored in
BLINK [10] and extensively used afterwards [5–7]. Lately, some novel
NEL paradigms are emerging: autoregressive entity linking [18] and
extractive entity linking [19]. In our work, we use a bi-encoder based
on BLINK, trained on the Italian Wikipedia, which, as we argue later on
in the paper (see Sections 4 and 6) provides a good trade-off between
performance and scalability [7].
NIL prediction. NIL prediction approaches, many originating from TACKBP, include techniques such as setting a score threshold on the NEL
score, incorporating an extra class for NIL, and utilizing a binary
classifier with the linking score and additional features as input [11].
More recently, the task has been addressed in two kinds of approaches
based on BLINK and evaluated on English benchmarks: the first kind
considers BLINK scores as features to classify mentions as NIL [5,6]
(see Section 4 for more details), while the second one clusters the
mentions’ representations to detect NIL entities [7]. A performancewise comparison of the two approaches is not available. In our work, we
use the first kind of approach because it can be executed on individual
mentions avoiding clustering.
NIL clustering. Several NIL Clustering approaches derive from TAC-KBP
editions, including methods based on lexical similarity [20], character
or word-based embeddings [21], or the combination of hand-crafted
features and word-embeddings [22]. NIL clustering is similar to coreference resolution, a task consisting of identifying mentions (NIL and
non-NIL) that refer to the same entity. Indeed, most recent NIL clustering approaches [6,9] derive from this thread. In our work, we use
a method specific for NIL Clustering that combines BLINK-based dense
representations (as used in the latter approaches) and lexical features
(as used in the first approaches) [5].
2.2. NLP, entity extraction and knowledge consolidation in the legal domain
Several approaches based on NLP have been proposed to improve
the management of legal documents in different use cases [23], including legal case summarization [24] and retrieval [25,26], legal rule
extraction [27], and data management for criminal investigations [28–
30]. The approaches proposed for criminal investigations are based
on entity-centric data management principles; therefore, they apply

https://tac.nist.gov/
3

V. Bellandi et al.

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105904

entity extraction techniques and, in some cases, describe downstream
applications where the extracted entities are used to support faceted
search engines [28]. However, these approaches apply entity extraction
to sources that are relevant for the investigations (e.g., scraped web
pages, images, police reports) but not proper legal documents like court
judgments, which represent specific legal language distributions. Also,
one of these approaches [28] does not apply end-to-end entity extraction pipelines for generic entities as we do in our work, but focuses on
specific pattern-based extraction rules. The approach proposed in [30]
admittedly discusses preliminary experiments and baseline algorithms.
Our work takes inspiration from these approaches, especially in terms
of data management principles and background architecture, but we
target different types of data, especially court judgments; with respect
to [30], we also use novel algorithms and a more solid evaluation.
Several approaches have focused on the application of entity extraction to legal data similar to ours, and, specifically, court judgments.
Most of these approaches have applied NER techniques, which support
a variety of downstream applications including anonymization, an
objective of interest for most legal systems worldwide. A thorough
review of previous work on NER applied in the legal domain can be
found in [3]. In order to avoid manual labeling, an approach developed
for Indian Supreme Court Judgements adopts a rule-based approach to
information extraction [31]; it classifies entities into domain-specific
types and extracts relations based on a custom ontology. The approach
has been evaluated on five judgments, obtaining high precision but
very limited recall for most of the entity types, a known bottleneck of
rule-based methods. However, combining different algorithms, including rule-based ones, was found to be beneficial for NER in the legal
domain [32,33]. In our paper, we evaluate several NER algorithms
that can be considered competitive on generic texts on Italian court
judgments, including algorithms based on contextualized word embeddings fine-tuned on our gold standard. Also, considering the evidence
reported in previous work, e.g., in [31], we prefer to focus now on
assessing and improving the extraction of a limited number of rather
generic entity types (see Section 3.1); we capture some specific types
of entities with rules (as discussed in Section 6) and we leave the task
of finer-grained entity classification for future work, a task for which
promising zero-shot methods are emerging [34].
A few approaches consider NEL in legal texts. An approach applied
NER and NEL on a corpus of judgments of the European Court of
Human Rights [35], using a legal ontology as background KB. Another approach proposes to apply NEL on the EUR-Lex law article
dataset [36]; it is trained using transfer learning. In our work, we
study an end-to-end combination of NER, NEL, NIL prediction, and
NIL Clustering for full-fledged knowledge consolidation and we use a
more recent pre-trained NEL approach [10]. Another study combined
BERT with rule-based techniques for NER and coupled it with an offthe-shelves NEL service to extract entities from court decisions in the
Finnish language [37]. This study is more similar to ours because
it also applies, to some extent, a knowledge consolidation approach;
however, we also focus on NIL Prediction and NIL Clustering, and we
use a BLINK-based NEL algorithm. Some work combining NEL and NIL
prediction has been evaluated on historic legal documents [38] (the
depositions of the 1641 Irish rebellion5 ). However, to the best of our
knowledge, no prior work investigated the combination of NER, NEL,
and NIL Prediction in recent court judgments.
Some approaches have focused on the extraction of abstract concepts and legal terminology [4], or other kinds of information. For example, a knowledge management system is proposed to semi-automate
the extraction of norms and their elements and populate legal ontologies [39], based on Semantic Role Labeling. Their approach consists
of general-purpose NLP modules with pre- and post-processing using
rules based on domain knowledge. These approaches have orthogonal

5

objectives compared to ours, which focus on named entities, and could
be in principle combined in the future.
Finally, NLP methods have been applied to support legal information retrieval and develop search engines. A few approaches focus
on leveraging text summarization techniques [24,26,40], but information extraction and retrieval are interconnected tasks [4], as appears
from contributions to the Competition on Legal Information Extraction/Entailment (COLIEE) organized since 2017 [41]. In this paper,
we do not focus on specific algorithms for legal information retrieval;
however, our entity extraction approach and architecture are intended
to support document search by exploiting entity-related annotations,
e.g., to populate search facets and filter out documents.
2.3. Architectures and entity-centric infrastructures for the legal domain
The body of work discussed in the previous sections has paid more
attention to conceptual frameworks, algorithms, and their evaluation,
and less attention to architectures to support the extraction processes
and to manage their output. However, a few studies have addressed
these problems from an architectural point of view in recent years.
In [42], the authors conducted a systematic mapping study to identify
and analyze state-of-the-art software architecture for NLP, in the field of
legal documents. They analyzed relevant papers and identified several
architectural approaches, including architectures based on pipelines,
services, and microservices. They have found that the last approaches
focus especially on pipelines, which involve a sequence of NLP modules
that process text in a predefined order. The authors also argue that
service-oriented and microservices architectures have advantages in
terms of flexibility and scalability. However, they do not identify a
generic infrastructure to manage entities in the legal domain as we do
in our work (see Section 5).
In the Ref. [43], the authors present a software architecture designed to aid legal professionals in resolving legal cases through automated extraction of crucial information from documents and generation
of potential arguments. This system employs a fusion of rule-based and
statistical natural language processing techniques, with a specific focus
on a dedicated knowledge extraction pipeline.
Certain architectures seamlessly integrate NLP services and ontologies. For example, in [44], a document management system within the
legal domain is elaborated, demonstrating the conversion of diverse
paper documents into RDF statements. This transformation enables
efficient indexing, retrieval, and long-term preservation. Another architecture, discussed in [45], concentrates on the analysis and extraction
of specific entities from legal texts like acts and agreements. This
approach relies on an ontology containing pertinent information about
document types, their structures, the entities to be extracted from each
section, and the requisite processing steps involving a pre-existing text
analysis library. The enhancement of system performance led to the
adoption of a microservices-based architecture integrated with message
brokers, as detailed in [46]. This implementation was integrated into a
high-level document management system used for extensive language
analysis of legal documents. It is worth noting that although this
implementation shares some characteristics with our own design, it
does not encompass the knowledge consolidation process central to our
work.
3. Data collection and gold standard
The creation of a gold standard is an essential part of the process required to adapt entity extraction and knowledge consolidation
algorithms to the legal domain, assess their performance, and drive
their improvement. In this section, we discuss the methodology used
to create this gold standard from a larger corpus and its features.
We collected a corpus of 927,453 real judgments in civil trials
published from 2008 to 2021 (the majority of the judgments, ≈86%,
are published from 2016 to 2021). This number can be compared to

http://1641.tcd.ie/
4

V. Bellandi et al.

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105904

the total number of trials that are estimated per year according to [47],
which falls between 2 and 2.5 millions from 2010 to 2019.
Data includes the judgment text and 41 metadata with information
about the judge (or the president if several judges are involved), the
number and year of the judgment and of the trial, the court and the
district it belongs to, the instance (trial or appeal), references to the
trial in case of appeal, a code describing the subject and some technical
fields of no interest here. This dataset has been provided by the Ministry
of Justice and consists of real documents as they were archived. As
a consequence, in many cases, the texts contain spurious lines that
must be cleared before processing, for instance, some metadata at the
very beginning, duplicate headings, extra blank lines or characters from
stamps present in the printed version.
The judgments’ structure consists of several sections, the most important being: (i) a preamble with the judge(s), plaintiff(s) and defendant(s) data, (ii) the description of the case, (iii) the final decision and
dispositions with the related reasons.

Based on [48], a detailed set of guidelines has been prepared and
provided to the annotators to reduce as much as possible the inconsistencies that could be generated by different styles of annotation. During
the annotation process, we iteratively refined the guidelines by keeping
track of the doubts cast by the annotators. The guidelines involve both
the span selection (e.g., in case of nested entities, annotate the span
of the most informative supported type: ‘‘Via Garibaldi 18, Roma[LOC]’’
must be preferred over ‘‘Via Garibaldi 18[LOC], Roma[LOC]’’) and the
type assignment (e.g., a type must be assigned based on the context in which the entity appear: ‘‘Mario Rossi, born in Italy[LOC]’’ vs
‘‘Italy[ORG] asked the European Union to ...’’). Furthermore, each type
has its own guidelines to deal with particular cases (e.g., exclude the
title of a person from the annotation: ‘‘Dr. Mario Rossi[PER]’’ must be
preferred over ‘‘Dr. Mario Rossi[PER]’’). Furthermore, we decided to
annotate mentions such as ‘‘the Judge’’ or ‘‘the Court’’ that are not
exactly in the scope of NER but close to the coreference resolution task,
because these mentions are relevant to the domain.
Document statistics. The resulting corpus counts 16,634 annotations
(∼114 annotations per document), with an average document length
of ∼1900 words. Each document required on average ∼15 min to be
annotated. The distribution of types is reported in Fig. 2.

3.1. Gold standard
From the corpus of 927,453 court judgments described above, we
defined a gold standard consisting of 146 labeled documents selected
using stratified sampling on the province of the court that made the
judgment. The annotation was performed semi-automatically: (i) the
documents were annotated with extraction algorithms, then (ii) the
human annotators reviewed the automatic annotations. This approach,
where algorithms are used to speed up the annotation process, has been
used for developing a NER gold standard in previous work [14].
The annotations include labels for NER, NEL, NIL prediction, and
NIL clustering.
These tasks are executed sequentially, thus, each step has been
performed by manually refining the output of the algorithm of interest
applied to the annotated documents from the previous step. For this
reason, we can consider the annotation process as a simulation of the
real human-in-the-loop use case, thus making it possible to estimate
the amount of time required by the final user to consolidate the main
pipeline algorithms output.
The annotation process involved the following entity classes:

Inter-annotator agreement. To assess the quality of the gold standard
and the clarity of the guidelines we compute the inter-annotator agreement (IAA) on the 30 overlapping documents, which are annotated
independently by both the annotators. Since there is no standard way
to evaluate the agreement level of a NER dataset [49], we adopted
an IAA based on F1 score computed with the criteria described in
Section 6.1.1. In this context, the F1 score is pair-wisely computed
between annotators: for each combination, an annotator is used as gold
standard to evaluate the other annotator; an average is computed in
case of more than two annotators.
Popular IAA metrics such as Cohen’s Kappa, Scott’s Pi, Fleiss’ Kappa,
and Krippendorff’s Alpha, may not be suitable for complex labeling
tasks such as NER, providing low interpretability values [49]. As discussed in Section 6.1.1, a problem of this task is that we deal with text
spans, so it is difficult to define a general criterion to identify positive
and negative examples to calculate a consistent IAA value [50]. A
simple solution to face this problem is to compute the metrics at tokenlevel, however this would yield overly optimistic IAA value (e.g., the
pair of ‘‘Barack Obama[PER] was born in Honolulu’’ and ‘‘Barack[PER]
Obama[PER] was born in Honolulu’’ is considered a perfect match). For
these reasons, the choice of an F1 score-based IAA as the main metric
is a more robust alternative to the classic metrics [51,52].
Table 1 shows all metrics averaged over documents. For completeness, we also report the token-level F1 score for the strong typed match
criteria and Cohen’s Kappa, Scott’s Pi, Fleiss’ Kappa, and Krippendorff’s
Alpha. We can see that strong-typed (instance-level), i.e., the strictest
metric, has a score of .808, which can be considered satisfactory
since it measures perfect matches between annotators. Moreover, by
looking at the additional F1 score-based metrics we can see that the
values increase as we relax the matching criterion (partial is the least
stringent). This proves that even in cases where the labels from the two
annotators do not perfectly match, there is still a significant degree of
overlap. These differences between hard and soft constrained F1 scores,
as well as the difference between instance-level and token-level strong
typed, also point out that a perfect span selection was the most difficult
part for the annotators, as expected.

1. ‘‘person’’,
2. ‘‘location’’,
3. ‘‘organization’’,
4. ‘‘money’’,
5. ‘‘date’’,
6. ‘‘miscellaneous’’.
To obtain an objective measure of the quality of the NER annotations (GS𝑁𝐸𝑅 ), which served as the starting point for subsequent
annotation processes, we calculated an inter-annotator agreement (IAA)
measure. We then used this gold standard as a basis for creating GS𝐶𝑂𝑁 ,
which includes annotations for the remaining tasks, also referred to as
the consolidation process.
3.1.1. NER
Annotation process. The annotation process for GS𝑁𝐸𝑅 has been carried
out by two annotators using Doccano6 , a web application for labeling
tasks. Each annotator was asked to annotate 88 documents, of which
15 were overlapping with the other annotator so that 30 documents
(15+15) contained annotation from both. These overlapping documents
are necessary for calculating the inter-annotator agreement (IAA). For
this specific task, an annotation is composed of the index of the start
character, the end index, and the type of the mentioned entity.

6

3.1.2. Knowledge consolidation
The gold standard GS𝐶𝑂𝑁 for the knowledge consolidation process,
with annotations for NER, NEL, NIL prediction, and NIL clustering, has
been created semi-automatically from the 30 overlapping documents
used to compute the IAA. The set of general guidelines defined for this
task is much simpler than the NER ones. Based on the assumptions
in [48], the guidelines can be summed up in two steps:

https://doccano.github.io/doccano/
5

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105904

V. Bellandi et al.

Fig. 2. Distribution of entity mention types in the GS𝑁𝐸𝑅 gold standard.
Table 1
Inter-annotator agreement computed on a subset of 30 documents from the gold standard GS𝑁𝐸𝑅 . The description of each
F1 score-based metric can be found in Section 6.1.1. *based on
strong typed match.
Metric

By using multiple NER algorithms, it becomes necessary to combine
the extracted annotations and resolve any conflicts that may arise.
To this end, we present heuristic-based combination rules, which are
described in the remainder of this section.

Value

4.1. Entity extraction

F1 score-based metrics
strong
strong typed (instance-level)
strong typed (token-level)
approximate
approximate typed
partial
partial typed

.839
.808
.886
.966
.904
.969
.906

For the NER task, two general-domain ML-based algorithms for the
Italian language have been selected: SpaCy and Tint. In addition, we
developed a rule-based service, namely TrieNER, supporting efficient
retrieval on a custom dictionary and on-the-fly update of the reference
dictionary.7 Each algorithm recognizes a different set of types; Table 2
shows which entity types of our gold standard are recognized by each
algorithm including the combination of them.
SpaCy8 is a NLP library designed to be production-ready, able to
perform NER in several languages including Italian. NER is performed
by first obtaining a vector representation of the input, in our case with
a pre-trained Italian transformer (dbmdz/bert-base-italian-uncased9 ),
then the vectors are processed by a neural transition-based parser. We
trained the SpaCy NER system on the Italian WikiNER dataset [53],
which is composed of annotated Wikipedia articles.
Tint [54] is an Italian NLP library based on Stanford CoreNLP [55].
The NER task is based on Conditional Random Fields (CRF) sequence
taggers, combined with rule-based systems to extract money, numbers,
and temporal expressions.
TrieNER10 is a pattern-matching approach, based on a prefix-tree
(or trie), that uses a dictionary of entity titles derived from documents
metadata. Entities are divided into tokens, personal names are enriched
by their permutations, and then the tokens are added to the trie index.
This algorithm also identifies partial matches, e.g. the name of a person
without the surname. This service is not limited to NER, indeed, besides
knowing the matched pattern is part of a named entity we are also
aware of the entity (or the entities if both can be mentioned with
the same pattern) from which the pattern has been derived. This
pattern-based algorithm is used to exploit metadata attached to the
judgments, which cover plaintiffs, defendants, and judges. Although
these metadata are incomplete, TrieNER is introduced to increase the
likelihood that, when an entity appears in the metadata, it is also
identified by the NER component. Supposing that ‘‘Jane Smith’’ is listed
as a plaintiff in the metadata, TrieNER would search for all the tokens
and their permutation in the text, finding mentions like ‘‘Ms. Smith’’
(with a partial match on the token ‘‘Smith’’) and ‘‘Smith Jane’’.
Finally, we need to combine the annotations produced by the different algorithms. Each NER annotation consists of a text span associated
with a type, thus conflicts may arise when the spans of two annotations
overlap (e.g., in ‘‘Mr. Cityville’’ we may have a first algorithm that
identifies ‘‘[Mr. Cityville (PER)]’’ while a second algorithm identifies

Other metrics
Cohen*/Fleiss*/Krippendorff*/Scott*

.662

1. if the mention refers to a known entity in the KB (Italian
Wikipedia and manually added entities) label it with the entity
URI and mark the mention as ¬NIL;
2. otherwise, mark the mention as NIL, create a new entity, and
label the mention with the new entity URI. This latter step
is necessary to trace which NIL mentions refer to the same
unknown entity (NIL clustering).
To enhance the efficiency of the annotation procedure a UI was
developed, incorporating both Wikipedia search API and a fuzzy search
mechanism. On average documents required ∼15 min to be annotated
for NEL, NIL prediction, and NIL clustering. Out of the 3006 annotated
mentions, 467 refer to Wikipedia entities, and 1753 to NIL entities. The
remaining 786 mentions, categorized as either Date or Money, were left
unassociated with any entity.
The 2200 mentions linked to an entity are organized into a total of
1025 clusters, with 211 clusters corresponding to Wikipedia entities.
The larger portion of 814 refers to NIL entities, as expected within the
considered domain.
4. Entity extraction and knowledge consolidation
To address RQ1, inspired by [5–7] we develop a pipeline system
that orchestrates first the entity extraction process, i.e., the NER task,
and then the knowledge consolidation processes, namely NEL, NIL
prediction, and NIL clustering. With NER we use different algorithms to
extract all the types annotated in GS𝑁𝐸𝑅 ; the algorithms are described
in detail in the remainder of this section.
Table 2 illustrates the supported types for each NER extractor, as
well as the NEL, NIL prediction, and NIL clustering algorithms. Notably,
for the latter three tasks, we exclusively consider the types ‘‘person’’,
‘‘location’’, and ‘‘organization’’. This decision is based on the fact that
‘‘date’’ and ‘‘money’’ are not directly associated with any linkable
entity. With respect to the ‘‘miscellaneous’’ class, during an exploratory
phase, we found that the quality of the prediction for this class, significantly lower than for the other classes, was not promising enough to
proceed with the knowledge consolidation process. We further discuss
this issue in the experimental evaluation.

7
On-the-fly dictionary update is not yet active in the current pipeline but
we consider it important for future development.
8
https://spacy.io/
9
https://huggingface.co/dbmdz/bert-base-italian-uncased
10
TrieNER is based on trie-search https://github.com/s-yata/marisa-trie.

6

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105904

V. Bellandi et al.

Table 2
Types supported by the NER, NEL, NIL prediction, and NIL Clustering algorithms. *Note that the TrieNER
relies on a knowledge base and it is potentially capable of extracting any entity regardless of its type as long
as a pattern is provided. In our experiments, TrieNER extracts entities of type ‘‘person’’ and ‘‘organization’’,
since the knowledge base (derived from documents metadata) of reference is limited to these two types.
Types

Person
Location
Organization
Money
Date
Miscellaneous

NER
SpaCy

Tint

TrieNER*

Combination

✓
✓
✓
–
–
✓

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
–

✓*
–
✓*
–
–
–

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

‘‘[Cityville (LOC)]’’) or when the types of two overlapping annotations are inconsistent (e.g., ‘‘Italy’’ identified both as Location and
Organization).
First, we identify span conflicts, then we address type-related conflicts:

NIL clust.

✓
✓
✓
–
–
–

✓
✓
✓
–
–
–

✓
✓
✓
–
–
–

5. Architecture
The software architecture is the foundational structure that shapes
the design and development of a software system. It serves as the
blueprint for creating robust, scalable, and maintainable applications.
The main characteristics of software architecture are pivotal in determining how well a system will perform, adapt, and evolve over time.
These characteristics define the essence of the architecture and guide
decisions throughout the development lifecycle. The main objective
of our proposal is to define a full stack system capable of supporting the main functional characteristics such as: (i) document analysis
and entity extraction, (ii) centralized annotation management (iii)
storage persistent and univocal of the identified entities and (iv) the
intra-documental and inter-documental search and entity management
functions. Furthermore, the modeling and design of the architecture
must also take into consideration characteristics not related to the
functionalities, in particular in our case we propose an architecture that
takes into consideration the following Non-Functional Requirements
(NFR):

4.2. Knowledge consolidation
The knowledge consolidation process involves the three tasks of
NEL, NIL prediction, and NIL clustering. NEL is executed by a biencoder based on BLINK [10]. The bi-encoder is a method for entity
retrieval trained to encode mentions and entity descriptions in the same
dense space, in such a way that the distance between a mention and the
corresponding entity description is minimized. The training objective
is to maximize the similarity of the correct mention-entity pairs; in
this case the similarity is calculated with the dot-product and basically
represents a linking score.
We chose the bi-encoder paradigm because it is able to produce a
semantic representation of both mentions and entities. This property
allows us to calculate the semantic similarity of entity mentions during the NIL clustering step and to represent new entities using their
mentions so that the NEL system is able to link to the new entities [5].
The training for the Italian language has been performed following
the approach of BLINK authors for the English language. We created
an entity linking dataset using the hyperlinks from Italian Wikipedia
articles as training samples where the anchor text is the mention.
Differently from [10], we used 𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝐵𝐴𝑆𝐸 12 instead of 𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝐿𝐴𝑅𝐺𝐸 for
computational reasons. The training process has been done in 4 epochs
with 9M training examples using in-batch random negatives followed
by one epoch of hard negatives in which we use a single hard negative
for each training sample. Given a mention, the hard negative is the
negative entity (not the correct one) with the highest linking score,
calculated using the bi-encoder trained with random negatives.
NIL prediction is implemented as a binary classification using logistic regression. It has been trained with the same Wikipedia-based

12

NIL pred.

dataset used to train the NEL model. Different combinations of input
features have been evaluated. The ones we are currently using are the
NEL score of the top-ranked entity and the difference between the top
score and the score of the second-best candidate.
The NIL clustering sub-service is inspired by a three-step algorithm [56]. First, mentions are clustered based on their surface form,
with a tolerance of edit-distance ≤ 3 for words longer than 3 characters,
or exact matching for shorter words. Next, a hierarchical clustering
algorithm is applied to each cluster, using a predetermined threshold
to split clusters based on the semantic representations of the mentions
generated by the NEL bi-encoder. NIL clustering thresholds are obtained with grid search using the same Wikipedia-based dataset used
to train the NEL model. This step creates sub-clusters within each firststep cluster. Finally, each sub-cluster is represented using the medoid
vector of all the mention representations of the sub-clusters, and those
that are semantically similar, according to the similarity (dot-product)
between the medoid vector, are merged.

1. two overlapping annotations may be totally overlapping (i.e.,
they share the same exact boundaries) or partially overlapping.
In the latter case, we prefer the longest annotation, assuming it
is the most informative one. Exceptionally, for the annotations
of type ‘‘person’’, we down-prioritize annotations whose span is
longer than 𝑘 tokens,11
2. with respect to type-related conflicts, different algorithms may
predict different types. Consequently, we assign a weight to each
algorithm and, in case of type-related conflicts, we perform a
weighted majority vote to select the type with the highest score (in
case two or more algorithms predicted the same type, the score
of the type is given by the sum of the algorithms’ weights). This
mechanism allows us to control the impact of each algorithm on
the final prediction.

11

NEL

• scalability: it must be possible to add documents just increasing storage and computing resources, with no needs of system
reconfiguration,
• extensibility: it must be possible to add new document types with
their metadata, new User Interfaces and new services, with no
impacts on the non involved systems and data,
• availability: subsystems must not suffer from changes, fixes, additions or just operation of other systems.
The main components of our architecture are described in the
following paragraphs.
The Document Storage (DS). The DS maintains document texts and
metadata as they can be found in the source systems. It is equipped
with APIs to import, export, update and query the document using both
text and metadata search. Multiple copies of the same document can
be stored, e.g. the raw text and preprocessed versions where some data

We heuristically found that 𝑘 = 6 fit the court judgment dataset.
https://huggingface.co/dbmdz/bert-base-italian-uncased
7

V. Bellandi et al.

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105904

cleaning has been done. It has been implemented as an ElasticSearch13
repository, with the possibility to manage several indexes each with
proper metadata to store different document types. All the metadata
described in Section 3 have been used for indexing; texts have been
cleaned before import.
The Query Layer (QL). The QL interfaces the DS and the annotation
database (see below) exposing APIs to query both data, so that client
programs do not interface directly the data storage components. The
output is in the format used by GateNLP14 to represent documents, annotations and document features. Presently the QL is not equipped with
a complete Access Control mechanism or component, just a simple login
mechanism is provided. The main API is used to query the documents
choosing logical expressions for the metadata, annotations and text
content, with the option to choose which metadata must be returned;
pagination is supported. Another API is used to add annotations.
The Front End User Interfaces (UI). Several UI have been provided. The Search UI prompts the user to enter the metadata and
annotations to query, with values and logical operators, the word or
sentence to look for in the document text and the data to display. The
output is shown in tabular form, with links to show the raw text and
to open the UI for single documents. Then the user may select to run
an analysis (performed by a Service System, see below) on the query
result. The UI interfaces the Request Management to queue the request.
A dedicated management section of the UI shows the pending, running
and terminated requests with messages and results details.
The Document UI receives the annotated document GateNLP data
from the QL and displays the text highlighting the annotations, that
are quotes of entities. The user can choose the annotation sets to
display/hide (i.e., showing annotations obtained using different algorithms); clicking an annotation shows details, such as its type hierarchy,
links to external sources (e.g. Wikipedia, Google Maps, the database
of Italian laws, etc.); alternative links. Users can modify or delete
annotations. They can create new annotations and new annotation
types. Moreover the UI shows the clusters of entities quoted in the
document. Entities, grouped by type, are shown in a side bar and can be
expanded to show clusters (e.g. the cluster of mentions of John Smith)
and to navigate to the related text section.
The Data Scientist UI is just a general purpose notebook, that
needs programmer skills by the user. The Entity Registry UI has both
functions to query and maintain the ER metamodel, and functions
to manage the entities, that is to search entities in the documents,
highlight their attributes, perform merge and split operations.
The Request Management (RM). It is used to request that a
specific service is run against a set of documents. Its APIs are called by
the UI when the user wants to create a request or to check the status
of their previous requests. It must be able to store parameters provided
by the users and to forward them to the service systems (SS). This may
happen using queues or any other suitable mechanisms. It has been
implemented as a queue system, using Apache Kafka, an open-source
distributed event streaming platform, where the SS can find parameters
to get the documents to work. It maintains a table with tasks, their
results and statuses.
The Annotation Database (AD). It stores annotations computed by
the service systems. Annotations refer to specific portions of document
texts and hold information about entities, sentences, sections and so
on. The AD has been implemented as a SQL database. The main
columns are: the identifiers of the SS that created the annotation and
of the document where it was found; the start and end position in
the document; the annotation keyword (e.g., ‘‘person’’, ‘‘organization’’,

etc.) and value; a field for extra features, in json format, that depend
on the annotation type (e.g. external links, notes, etc.)
The Service Systems (SS). Any SS receive as input texts and
annotations and compute either new annotations or new text versions
(e.g. after cleaning some type of garbage or summarizing and so on).
They use the QL APIs to get the data and to store their output, read
parameters from the RM system and expose standard APIs to be called
by it.
Examples of Service Systems include algorithms that extract fixed
format expressions, such as Italian Fiscal Codes, car plates, and phone
numbers, but also algorithms that extract more complex and variable
expressions like postal addresses and references to law articles.
Finally, a basic rule-based cleaning service was provided, that removes unnecessary line feeds, page headings (e.g. page numbering, and
so on), and repeated sets of lines of a few characters. This last case
applies when a page, that has been scanned and processed by an Optical
Character Recognizer, contained a vertical writing like a long stamp in
the margin.
The Entity Registry (ER). The ER is a system where each entity
found by the SS and stored in the AD has a unique entry used for
disambiguation. Moreover, queries based on ER entries can be run
against all the documents in the system. A general ER model has been
described for instance in [58] and an application to another legal
context in [30]. It consists of a metamodel and a database of entries.
The metamodel stores the entity types and, for each type, the set of
attributes that suffice to completely identify an instance. An example
of an entity type is ‘‘person’’ whose identifying set of attributes might
be personal code and the tuple (first name(s), last name, birth date,
birth place). The ER exposes APIs to store, retrieve and manage both
the metamodel and the instances. The ER has been implemented as a
graph database using Neo4j15 as database manager. A dedicated server
interfaces Neo4j and exposes both APIs to manage the metamodel and
APIs to manage the entities. When an entity is created, the ER assigns
a unique identifier to it. Some special APIs are provided, for instance
to merge two entities that have been belatedly recognized to be the
same in the real world or to split one, when two real world entities
have been erroneously considered the same.
The Service Catalog (SC). The SC stores addresses and functions of
the available services and of the SS that provide them. The kernel of
the SC is a table holding the addresses of the SS, with the names and
parameters of the services they provide. When a new SS is added to the
catalog, it is immediately callable by the RM service.
The Service Orchestrator (SO). It manages workflows of SS to be
applied at document sets and to schedule periodic operations, or task
needed when a triggering event happens. Using the SO, it is possible
to combine any services to implement complex workflows; for instance
we created a workflow to feed the ER with entities acting as plaintiff,
defendant or lawyers. The first service finds the preamble in the judgment; then are run services to find persons and organizations, fiscal
codes, dates, places, and postal addresses in the preambles. Finally
another service links each person with their fiscal codes or place and
date of birth; each organization with its fiscal code; each person and
organization with their address (if specified). Resulting persons and
organizations are added to the ER, using their names and fiscal codes
or birth data as identifiers.
Final Considerations. The situation is sketched in Fig. 3, that
highlights the main flows of data and control. The central role of the UI
reflects the importance of the user in the whole process of knowledge
extraction, especially for the validation and management of annotations
(so called human–in–the–loop).
The requirement of scalability is addressed by the implementation
of the Document Storage and the Annotation Database. The requirement of extensibility to new types of documents and metadata is

13
ElasticSearch (https://www.elastic.co/) is a distributed, free and open
search and analytics engine for textual, numerical, geospatial, structured, and
unstructured data.
14
where GATE stands for General Architecture for Text Engineering, a suite
of tools for natural language processing; see e.g. [57]

15
A graph databases stores nodes and relationships instead of tables or
documents and Neo4j (https://neo4j.com/) is a well known implementation.

8

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105904

V. Bellandi et al.

whether a NIL mention was grouped in the correct cluster,
leading to a too broad space of possible outcomes (e.g., the NIL
mention is grouped with one correct and one wrong mention,
the NIL mention is grouped with only one correct mention out
of 𝑛).
To better study the difficulty of the domain we compare with NER
and NEL results on standard benchmarks in the Italian language:
WikiNER [53] and I-CAB [60] for NER; Italian VoxEL [61] and NEELIT [59] for NEL.
To address RQ2, we study the domain-specific extensibility and the
scalability of our proposal. For the former, we consider the use case
in which two rule-based additional extractors (RAE) are incorporated
into the architecture to extract law articles and postal addresses. For
the scalability experiment, we study the required time for processing a
document as the number of words increases with the full pipeline and
also with the two rule-based additional extractors.
In the remainder of this section, we present the evaluation metrics
and the evaluation results of the experiments related to RQ1 and to
RQ2.
Fig. 3. Architecture sketch.

6.1. RQ1 experiments
The different tasks involved in the RQ1 are analyzed according to
the following metrics and criteria.

addressed by the implementation of the Data Storage and the Annotation Database; moreover as the Query Layer produces annotated
documents in GateNLP, the consumer programs are not affected by data
extensions. Extensibility of User Interfaces and services is guaranteed
as they use the Query Layer to read and write the data, and because
they are registered in the Service Catalog and run through the Request
Manager and the Service Orchestrator. The requirement of availability
is satisfied as, provided that the data related components (DS, AD and
QL) are running, the User Interface(s) and Service Systems can be
registered, run, stopped, changed and so on without interfering with
each other. As they can be run on different computing units, they have
no impacts on the performances of other components.

6.1.1. Evaluation metrics and criteria
For the atomic evaluation of NER, we calculate precision, recall,
and F1 score with different matching criteria that determine when
an extracted mention is correct with respect to the human-annotated
gold standard. Indeed in some contexts, ‘‘partially-correct’’ annotations might be acceptable, e.g., identifying ‘‘A4 Highway’’ instead of
‘‘A4 Highway Torino-Trieste’’ might be informative enough [1,62].
Furthermore, in a human-in-the-loop scenario, we prefer to detect
partially-correct annotations rather than to miss them, since a human
can quickly correct annotation boundaries.
The adopted criteria, taken from [62] and extended to provide both
a typed and untyped evaluation, allow us to assess the behavior of
the algorithms at different severity levels. The metrics are defined as
follows:

6. Experiments
With respect to the RQ1 we evaluate the proposed entity extraction
and knowledge consolidation pipeline in the following experimental
settings:

1. strong: the predicted entity has an exact span match with the
gold standard annotations;
2. strong typed: the predicted entity has an exact span match and the
type is correct with respect to the gold standard annotations;
3. approximate: the predicted entity is contained in the correct span
(or vice versa);
4. approximate typed: the predicted entity is contained in the correct
span (or vice versa) and the type is correct;
5. partial: the predicted entity is overlapping with the correct span;
6. partial typed: the predicted entity is overlapping with the correct
span and the type is correct;

1. Atomic: we analyze the performance of each algorithm atomically to isolate it from the effects of error propagation. For NER
we use GS𝑁𝐸𝑅 as the evaluation dataset and GS𝐶𝑂𝑁 for the
knowledge consolidation tasks. We remind that knowledge consolidation tasks, i.e, NEL, NIL prediction, and NIL clustering are
applied, and evaluated, only on annotations of type ‘‘person’’,
‘‘location’’, and ‘‘organization’’ (see Section 4). Moreover, This
analysis aligns with the concept of human-in-the-loop validation,
in which the results of each step can be refined by humans
prior to being utilized as input for the subsequent stages within
the pipeline. For NER, we additionally calculate performance
metrics on a per-type basis and with different criteria, including
more relaxed ones that also accept spans that are partially
correct (see Section 6.1.1).
2. NEL with NIL prediction: we study the combined performance of
NEL and NIL prediction, since these two tasks are closely related,
isolating them from NER errors. To achieve this, we execute
NEL and NIL prediction on gold standard NER annotations from
GS𝐶𝑂𝑁 .
3. End-to-end: we analyze the behavior of our system on each
mention of GS𝐶𝑂𝑁 for the tasks NER, NEL, and NIL prediction
(as done for NEEL [59]), wherein an input mention can be
finally linked to an entity in the KB or classified as NIL. NIL
clustering is not included in the end-to-end evaluation because
it complicates the evaluation since it would require evaluating

For the sake of clarity, given 𝑐 is the chosen criterion from the
above, 𝑌𝑐𝑖 the number of correctly predicted annotations according to
𝑐, 𝑌 𝑖 the total number of predicted annotations, and 𝑌𝐺 the expected
number of annotations in the gold standard, precision is defined as
𝑌𝑖
𝑃 = 𝑌𝑐𝑖 , that is the number of correctly predicted annotations divided
𝑌𝑖

by the total number of predicted annotations. Recall is 𝑅 = 𝑌 𝑐 , the
𝐺
ratio of correctly predicted annotations and the expected number of
annotations, and, finally F1 score is the harmonic mean of 𝑃 and 𝑅:
∗𝑅
𝐹1 = 2 ∗ 𝑃𝑃 +𝑅
.
NEL is atomically evaluated on accuracy, that is the number of
mentions linked to the correct entity divided by the total number of
mentions to link, and recall@k. This latter metric assesses whether the
correct entity is among the top-k candidates with the highest linking
score (in our case accuracy and recall@1 are equivalent). Note that
9

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105904

V. Bellandi et al.

Table 3
Results obtained by our algorithms (SpaCy and Tint) on Italian benchmark
datasets compared with recent competitive approaches. I-CAB [60] contains
the types ‘‘person’’, ‘‘location’’, and ‘‘organization’’. WikiNER [53] additionally
considers the type ‘‘miscellaneous’’.

SpaCy on WikiNER [53]
GilBERToa on WikiNER
BERTino on WikiNER [63]
BERTino Teacher Model on WikiNER [63]
Tint on I-CAB [60]
a

P

R

F1

.919
.927
–
–
.844

.919
.927
–
–
.800

.919
.928
.904
.918
.821

Table 4
Atomic NER evaluation (precision, recall, F1 score) with different matching criteria
(rows), typed and untyped. These results are obtained using the combination of the
NER algorithms and considering all the evaluated types.
Untyped

strong
approximate
partial

Typed

P

R

F1

P

R

F1

.519
.869
.874

.437
.680
.686

.475
.763
.769

.447
.646
.649

.377
.531
.533

.409
.583
.586

Table 5
Atomic NER evaluation by type and algorithm using approximate typed match. *Miscellanea mentions are excluded from the overall calculation. **Note that the type
Organization is underrepresented in the knowledge base used by TrieNER, thus only a
few entities of this type (i.e., 10) have been predicted.

https://github.com/idb-ita/GilBERTo.

NEL, and also NIL prediction and NIL clustering, is evaluated solely
on the types ‘‘person’’, ‘‘location’’, and ‘‘organization’’.
For the atomic evaluation of the NIL prediction classifier, we calculate precision, recall, and F1 score for both the NIL and ¬NIL classes.
The NIL prediction task strongly relies on the NEL score, thus to
evaluate it independently from NEL we consider correct when mentions
linked to a wrong entity are classified as NIL: in this case, the topranked entity, according to NEL, is not the correct one and the NIL
prediction classifier is based on the assumption that when the correct
entity is not the top-ranked one, then, it does not exist in the KB.
NIL clustering, similarly to coreference resolution tasks [9], is evaluated atomically with the metrics MUC, B3 , and CEAF𝑒 . For each of
them, we calculate precision, recall, and F1 score. For the evaluation to
be independent of error propagation, we run the clustering algorithm
only for the NIL mentions from the gold standard.
For the joint evaluation of NEL with NIL prediction, starting from the
gold standard NER annotations, we calculate the accuracy on (i) all the
mentions, (ii) on the mentions that should be linked to the KB, and
(iii) on the mentions that should be classified as NIL. They respectively
represent the ratio of all the mentions, of the ¬NIL mentions, and of
the NIL mentions that were correctly processed.
Finally, for the end-to-end evaluation of NER, NEL, and NIL prediction, we expanded the evaluation criteria for NER defining approximate
linking and approximate typed linking as the criteria that extend the
respective NER metric by additionally considering NEL and NIL prediction. Thus an annotation is correct only when boundaries and type
(when typed) are correct, and it is linked to the correct entity (and
classified as ¬NIL) or correctly identified as NIL. For each of the two
criterion, we measure precision, recall, and F1 score.
The hyperparameters for the combination rules are determined
with preliminary tests. The weights assigned to each algorithm are as
follows: 0.3 for SpaCy, 0.1 for Tint, and 0.6 for TrieNER.

Type

Algorithm

P

R

F1

Person

SpaCy
Tint
TrieNER
Combination

.921
.903
.767
.815

.763
.621
.346
.799

.835
.736
.477
.807

Location

SpaCy
Tint
TrieNER
Combination

.354
.492
–
.599

.908
.826
–
.601

.510
.617
–
.600

Organization

SpaCy
Tint
TrieNER
Combination

.582
.656
.900
.342

.409
.565
.002
.920

.481
.607
.005
.499

Date

SpaCy
Tint
TrieNER
Combination

–
.837
–
.837

–
.552
–
.551

–
.665
–
.665

Money

SpaCy
Tint
TrieNER
Combination

–
.981
–
.981

–
.573
–
.569

–
.723
–
.720

Miscellaneous

SpaCy
Tint
TrieNER
Combination

.251
–
–
.264

.041
–
–
.039

.070
–
–
.068

Overall*

SpaCy
Tint
TrieNER
Combination

.638
.748
.767
.660

.432
.601
.113
.676

.515
.666
.197
.668

obtained by the combination may seem counterintuitive, but this difference is caused by boundary conflicts that can also happen between
mentions of different types.
SpaCy is effective in recognizing the types ‘‘person’’ and ‘‘location’’
while Tint is superior for organizations. The evaluation of TrieNER
obtains high precision and low recall. Indeed, this approach misses all
the entities that are not included in its dictionary (in the experiments
the dictionary is mostly composed of persons and a few organizations).
Our combination rules achieved a good compromise between precision and recall even if they do not outperform the best algorithm
for each type: an F1 score of 0.668 was obtained with the approximate
matching criterion.
The results of SpaCy and Tint on standard benchmarks confirm the
challenging and diverse nature of the domain: by comparing Tables 3
and 4 it is evident that NER algorithms experience a noticeable decline
in performance when applied to domain-specific data. Looking at pertype performances (Table 5), across almost all types we observe lower
performance compared to the results of the evaluation on benchmark
datasets. Notably, in handling the class ‘‘person’’ our proposed system
demonstrates relatively similar outcomes (F1 > 0.8), while the identification of miscellanea mentions proves highly ineffective. This result
can likely be attributed to the distinct characteristics of domain-specific
miscellanea, which differ significantly from the miscellanea found in

6.1.2. Results
First, we present a comparative table (Table 3) with the outcomes achieved by two of our NER algorithms, SpaCy (combined with
BERT𝐵𝐴𝑆𝐸 and Tint, across benchmark datasets. We also include the
results from two other recent and competitive approaches for reference.
It is visible that our SpaCy algorithm, which exploits a BERT encoder,
is competitive with recent approaches.
In Table 4 we show the results for the atomic evaluation of NER. As
expected there is a substantial difference between the results obtained
using strong and approximate criteria, highlighting that our system in
several cases is able to identify entities but struggles to find the best
boundaries. However, boundary errors can be fixed relatively quickly
with human-in-the-loop intervention. Furthermore, the difference between approximate and partial criteria is minimal, thus, we consider the
approximate criteria permissive enough and we omit the partial criteria
in the remainder of the section.
In Table 5 we report a per-type comparison of the atomic evaluation of NER algorithms and of their combination. The types ‘‘date’’,
‘‘money’’, and ‘‘miscellaneous’’ are recognized by a single algorithm,
Tint for the former two and SpaCy for the latter. The different results
10

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105904

V. Bellandi et al.

Table 6
NEL results on benchmark datasets: strict (s-) and relaxed (r-) version of Italian VoxEL
[61] and NEEL-IT@Evalita 2016 [59]. for NEEL-IT, Twitter profile tags (@username)
and hashtags (#tag) were filtered out.

Accuracy
R@100

s-VoxEL-it

r-VoxEL-it

NEEL-IT

.889
.968

.647
.915

.690
–

Table 9
Rule-based additional extractors (RAE) evaluation. The matching criterion is the strong
typed matching.

Table 7
Atomic evaluation of the knowledge consolidation tasks.
.735
.908

NIL
¬NIL

P
.922
.585

R
.865
.720

F1
.892
.645

MUC
B3
CEAF𝑒

P
.719
.164
.072

R
.839
.601
.317

F1
.774
.258
.117

in KB
.468

NIL
.919

All
.791

NIL prediction

NIL clustering

NEL & NIL prediction
Accuracy

Table 8
end-to-end NER, NEL, and NIL prediction evaluation.

approximate linking
approximate typed linking

P

R

F1

.598
.523

.689
.609

.640
.563

Algorithm

P

R

F1

Postal Address
Law Articles

RAE
RAE

.902
1.0

.881
.702

.892
.825

articles found in our corpus. In addition to identifying the boundaries of
the mentions, the extractors also link postal addresses to geographic coordinates, using off-the-shelves geocoding services, and law articles to
their pages on the Normattiva16 website, coherently with the example
in Fig. 1.
We evaluate the two RAEs algorithms on the set of documents of
GS𝐶𝑂𝑁 (see Section 3.1) annotated by a single annotator, which results
in 210 annotations of law articles and 37 of postal addresses. We
calculate precision, recall, and F1 score with the strictest criterion strong
typed match. The results are shown in Table 9.
‘‘Postal address’’ and ‘‘law articles’’ can be considered as a specialization of ‘‘location’’ and ‘‘miscellaneous’’. We observe that the F1
score calculated for both these types are significantly higher than the
ones calculated for ‘‘location’’ and ‘‘miscellaneous’’ (see Table 5). This
confirms the hypothesis that combining rule-based entity extractors
for entities mentioned with predictable patterns can be beneficial.
Therefore, we integrate these annotations with the ones produced by
the pipeline described in Section 4 by prioritizing RAEs’ annotations in
case of overlap.
The results of the RAE performance evaluation are shown in Table 9. When comparing them with the NER results, it becomes evident
that RAEs achieve significantly higher performance measures. This
demonstrates the efficacy of rule-based algorithms for law articles and
postal addresses and confirms the successful outcome of the integration
process.

NEL
Accuracy
R@100

Type

standard benchmarks. For the remaining classes ‘‘location’’, ‘‘organization’’, ‘‘date’’, and ‘‘money’’ the evaluation exhibits F1 scores ranging
between 0.5 and 0.7. This suggests that the tested algorithms, trained
on the available benchmark datasets, have the capability to process
these types, although there is still significant room for improvement,
e.g., via domain-specific fine-tuning.
The results of the atomic evaluation of the different knowledge
consolidation tasks are shown in Table 7. NEL achieves satisfying
results, with an accuracy of 0.735, and a recall@100 of 90.8%, in line
with the results obtained on benchmark dataset (see Table 6). With
respect to NIL prediction, the classifier is effective in identifying NIL
mentions but it suffers with ¬NIL ones obtaining an F1 score of 0.645.
The biggest weakness of the consolidation process is the NIL clustering
component which obtains low F1 score values for B3 and CEAF𝑒 metrics.
The joint evaluation of NEL and NIL prediction (independent from
NER errors) results in the 79.1% of mentions correctly processed.
These include NIL mentions that the system identified with a very high
accuracy of 0.919, while for the mentions that should be linked to the
KB, the accuracy is 0.468; this can be explained by a bias in the NIL
prediction that tends to predict the NIL class.
Finally, Table 8 reports the evaluation with the end-to-end evaluation with the approximate linking and approximate typed linking criteria.
The results obtained with approximate linking, which ignores the recognized NER type, are noticeably better than with approximate typed
linking : the F1 score is 0.640, almost 8% higher. This finding suggests
that, once the mention has been linked by NEL, the linked entity may
also allow to correct or consolidate the type identified by NER.

6.2.2. Scalability
In Fig. 4 we show the execution time of the full entity extraction
and knowledge consolidation pipeline and of the RAEs. It is visible that
time grows linearly with respect to the number of words processed.
Note that the execution time of NIL clustering (part of the full pipeline)
scales non-linearly with the number of NIL mentions to cluster, thus
it is necessary to limit the document size and eventually divide long
documents into smaller chunks. In our experiments, the algorithms are
executed separately on each document that contains on average 2000
words.
6.3. Discussion
We now discuss the results in the context of the initial research
questions, focusing on the limitations of the proposed solution and their
impact on the specific application domain.
With respect to RQ1, in the end-to-end evaluation our system
achieved an F1 score of 0.640 (with the approximate linking criterion). This means that more than one mention out of two is correctly
processed by NER, NEL, and NIL prediction. Taking into account the
high specificity of the domain, the noisy input, and the absence of
in-domain training or fine-tuning, we believe that the baseline for
identifying and linking entities is promising. However, the final NIL
clustering step achieved unsatisfactory results according to B3 and
CEAF𝑒 metrics, although MUC metrics seem satisfactory. Providing
an intuitive interpretation of the clustering scores is more complicated. Results obtained by state-of-the-art NIL clustering algorithms
on benchmark data in English vary significantly, across measures
and datasets [9]. An ineffective NIL clustering step badly affects the

6.2. RQ2 experiments
This section presents the result from the extensibility and scalability
experiments.
6.2.1. Extensibility
We develop the two rule-based additional extractors (RAE) using
pattern-matching rules based on references to postal addresses and law

16

11

https://www.normattiva.it/

V. Bellandi et al.

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105904

Our architecture additionally offers the capability of human-in-the-loop
revision of the annotations produced by the algorithms. Furthermore,
the human-in-the-loop process we used for creating the gold standard
enabled us to estimate 30 min as the average required time to fully
revise the automatic annotations of an Italian judgment. This translates
to the revision of 320 judgments per month by a single full-time
annotator. This estimation serves as an upper limit for assessing the
costs linked to human-involved entity extraction.

7. Conclusion and future works
In our paper, we proposed an entity-centric framework designed
for the effective management of legal documents, particularly court
judgments. This framework revolves around structuring a repository
of textual documents and enhancing their utility through meticulous
annotation. These annotations cater to a diverse range of subsequent
tasks. The documents undergo preliminary processing before undergoing iterative annotation. This annotation process is facilitated by a
set of NLP services that synergistically combine machine learning and
rule-based strategies to ensure comprehensive coverage and accuracy.
The framework is designed to be developed and maintained in a sustainable way, allowing for multiple services and uses of the annotated
document repository. The scarcity of annotated data was considered an
intrinsic challenge for its development. This design activity is the result
of a cooperative project where a scientific team, institutional bodies,
and companies appointed to implement the final system were involved
in co-design activities.
In the second part of the paper, we described experiments to demonstrate the feasibility of the solution and the main challenges to scaling
the system at a national level. In particular, the results obtained in
annotating data with different low-resource methods and with solutions
designed to combine these approaches in a meaningful way were
reported. An essential aspect of the proposed solution is a human-inthe-loop approach to control the output of the annotation algorithms in
agreement with the organizational processes in place in Italian courts.
Based on these results, the feasibility of the proposed approach was
advocated and the challenges that must be addressed to ensure the
scalability and robustness of the proposed solution were discussed.
As part of future work, we plan to further explore the human-inthe-loop integration by incorporating mechanisms that learn from user
feedback, similar to what has been done for other tasks (e.g., knowledge
exploration [65], ontology matching [66], entity reconciliation [67]).
We observe that while our experiments are focused on a national
case study, the system can be adapted to handle legal documents from
different countries and languages with minor adjustments. Specifically,
only the Service Systems need replacement, as they employ languagespecific models and rules, and the Entity Registry metamodel should be
reviewed to accommodate country-specific codes and conventions for
identifying persons, laws, etc. Furthermore, after a thorough entity type
revision, the system could handle documents related to other subjects.

Fig. 4. Execution time of some analyses varying the number of processed words. Our
point is to show the performance trend, not their absolute values, that are hardware
dependent.

knowledge consolidation process of NIL mentions. A possible solution is
to optimize the clustering hyperparameters (i.e., clustering thresholds)
on a domain-specific dataset, indeed, recent work [9] suggests that
in-domain optimization may be beneficial.
Also the observed bias of the NIL prediction algorithm towards the
NIL class may be mitigated by domain-specific training. Nevertheless,
it is important to note that within court judgments, this concern holds
minor significance, given that the most relevant entities are usually NIL
(e.g., plaintiff, defendants, judges, and attorneys).
The results also reveal that NER algorithms trained on accessible
datasets and applied to the specific domain exhibit a reduction in
effectiveness with the only exception of the type ‘‘person’’. Considering
that NER holds the first position within the pipeline, it significantly
affects all the subsequent tasks. For this reason, we underscore the
importance of domain-specific fine-tuning for the NER algorithms. We
proved the impact of domain-specific fine-tuning in [64] in which we
fine-tuned the SpaCy approach, which utilizes a BERT encoder, on our
gold standard, achieving an F1 score of 0.822, with the strictest strong
typed match criterion. This increase by about 100% (see Table 4) has an
impact also on the performance evaluated in the end-to-end experiment
that with the domain-specific NER model achieves an F1 of 0.661 with
the strong typed match criterion (10% higher of the results calculated
with approximate typed in Table 8).
As for RQ2, the rule-based additional extractors (RAE) and most
of the steps in the full pipeline perform operations that scale linearly
with the number of input words. The only exception is NIL clustering,
which is sensitive to the number of mentions to cluster that depends on
the number of words. However, applying the algorithms to boundedsize documents, and eventually dividing long documents into smaller
chunks, allows the system to fulfill the requirement of scalability.
The implemented architecture meets scalability, extensibility, and
availability requirements (see Section 5), enabling the processing of
annotations for distinct document subsets and seamless expansion by
adding nodes for increased document numbers. Indeed, several operations are performed by independent systems that can run asynchronously. These operations include the NER algorithms and the
rule-based additional extractors, while other services like NEL strictly
depend on the previous steps. As a consequence, the architecture is
compatible with the map reduce strategy, allowing the repository of documents to be efficiently loaded and analyzed in stages, and eliminating
the need for an expensive cold start process.
The results discussed so far provide insights into the feasibility,
in terms of effectiveness and efficiency, of a solution that extracts
and semantically consolidates entity mentions from Italian judgments.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Data availability
The authors do not have permission to share data.
12

V. Bellandi et al.

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105904

Acknowledgments

[16] Yamada I, Shindo H, Takeda H, Takefuji Y. Joint learning of the embedding of
words and entities for named entity disambiguation. In: Proceedings of the 20th
SIGNLL conference on computational natural language learning. Association for
Computational Linguistics; 2016.
[17] Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, Uszkoreit J, Jones L, Gomez AN, et al.
Attention is all you need. In: Advances in neural information processing systems.
Vol. 30, Curran Associates, Inc.; 2017.
[18] De Cao N, Wu L, Popat K, Artetxe M, Goyal N, Plekhanov M, et al. Multilingual
autoregressive entity linking. Trans Assoc Comput Linguist 2022;10.
[19] Procopio L, Conia S, Barba E, Navigli R. Entity disambiguation with entity
definitions. In: Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the European Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational
Linguistics; 2023, p. 1297–303.
[20] Xu M, Nosirova N, Jiang K, Wei F, Jiang H. FOFE-based deep neural networks
for entity discovery and linking. In: Text analysis conference (TAC 2017). Vol.
10, 2017.
[21] Blissett K, Ji H. Cross-lingual NIL entity clustering for low-resource languages.
In: Proceedings of the second workshop on computational models of reference,
anaphora and coreference. Minneapolis, USA: Association for Computational
Linguistics; 2019.
[22] Zirikly A, Diab MT, Benajiba Y. GWU english TAC-KBP EL diagnostic task with
name mention. In: Text analysis conference (TAC 2015). Vol. 8, 2015.
[23] Zhong H, Xiao C, Tu C, Zhang T, Liu Z, Sun M. How does NLP benefit legal
system: A summary of legal artificial intelligence. In: Proceedings of the 58th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for
Computational Linguistics; 2020, p. 5218–30.
[24] Kanapala A, Jannu S, Pamula R. Passage-based text summarization for legal
information retrieval. Arab J Sci Eng 2019;44.
[25] Carvalho D, Tran V, Tran V-K, Minh L-N. Improving legal information retrieval by
distributional composition with term order probabilities. In: 4th Competition on
Legal Information Extraction and Entailment (COLIEE 2017), 16th International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law (ICAIL 2017). 2017.
[26] Perotto F, Verstaevel N, Trabelsi I, Vercouter L. Combining bandits and lexical
analysis for document retrieval in a juridical corpora. In: Artificial Intelligence
XXXVII: 40th SGAI International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AI 2020,
Cambridge, UK, December 15–17, 2020, Proceedings. Springer; 2020, p. 317–30.
[27] Dragoni M, Villata S, Rizzi W, Governatori G. Combining natural language
processing approaches for rule extraction from legal documents. In: AICOL 2017:
AI approaches to the complexity of legal systems, lecture notes in computer
science. Vol. 10791, 2018, p. 287–300.
[28] Kejriwal M, Szekely P, Knoblock C. Investigative knowledge discovery for
combating illicit activities. IEEE Intell Syst 2018;33.
[29] Pérez FJ, Garrido VJ, García A, Zambrano M, Kozik R, Choraś M, et al.
Multimedia analysis platform for crime prevention and investigation. Multimedia
Tools Appl 2021.
[30] Batini C, Bellandi V, Ceravolo P, Moiraghi F, Palmonari M, Siccardi S. Semantic
data integration for investigations: Lessons learned and open challenges. In: 2021
IEEE international conference on smart data services (SMDS). 2021.
[31] Sarika J, Pooja H, Nandana M, Sudipto G, Abhinav D, Ankush B. Constructing
a knowledge graph from Indian legal domain corpus. In: Text2KG 2022:
International workshop on knowledge graph generation from text, co-located
with the ESWC 2022. Vol. 3184, 2022.
[32] Andrew JJ, Tannier X. Automatic extraction of entities and relation from legal
documents. In: Proceedings of the Seventh Named Entities Workshop. Association
for Computational Linguistics; 2018, p. 1–8.
[33] Leitner E, Rehm G, Moreno-Schneider J. Fine-grained named entity recognition
in legal documents. In: Semantic systems. the power of AI and knowledge graphs:
15th international conference, SEMANTiCS 2019. Springer; 2019, p. 272–87.
[34] Huang J, Meng Y, Han J. Few-shot fine-grained entity typing with automatic
label interpretation and instance generation. In: Proceedings of the 28th ACM
SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. KDD ’22, 2022,
p. 605–14.
[35] Cardellino C, Teruel M, Alemany LA, Villata S. A low-cost, high-coverage legal
named entity recognizer, classifier and linker. In: Proceedings of the 16th edition
of the international conference on articial intelligence and law. ICAIL ’17,
Association for Computing Machinery; 2017, p. 9–18.
[36] Elnaggar A, Otto R, Matthes F. Deep learning for named-entity linking with
transfer learning for legal documents. In: Proceedings of the 2018 artificial intelligence and cloud computing conference. AICCC ’18, Association for Computing
Machinery; 2018, p. 23–8.
[37] Tamper M, Oksanen A, Tuominen J, Hietanen A, Hyvönen E. Automatic annotation service APPI: Named entity linking in legal domain. In: The semantic web:
ESWC 2020 satellite events. ESWC 2020. Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Springer; 2020, p. 208–13.
[38] Klie J-C, Eckart de Castilho R, Gurevych I. From zero to hero: Human-inthe-loop entity linking in low resource domains. In: Proceedings of the 58th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for
Computational Linguistics; 2020, p. 6982–93.
[39] Humphreys L, Boella G, van der Torre L, et al. Populating legal ontologies using
semantic role labeling. Artif Intell Law 2021;29:171–211.

This research has received funding from:
• CINI (Consorzio Interuniversitario Nazionale per l’Informatica), in
the context of the project Datalake@Giustizia;
• the Italian Ministry of Justice, in the context of the project PON
Next Generation UPP;
• the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation
programme (grant agreement No 101070284 - enRichMyData);
• the Università degli Studi di Milano within the program ‘‘Piano
di sostegno alla ricerca’’;
• the European Union within the MUSA – Multilayered Urban
Sustainability Action – project, in the NextGenerationEU National
Recovery and Resilience Plan (NRRP) Mission 4 Component 2
Investment Line 1.5: Strenghtening of research structures and
creation of R&D ‘‘innovation ecosystems’’, set up of ‘‘territorial
leaders in R&D;
• the European Union within the SERICS projects (PE00000014)
under the MUR NRRP - NextGenerationEU.
References
[1] Nadeau D, Sekine S. A survey of named entity recognition and classification.
Lingvisticae Investigationes 2007;30(1).
[2] Armentano MG, Godoy D, Campo M, Amandi A. NLP-based faceted search:
Experience in the development of a science and technology search engine. Expert
Syst Appl 2014;41(6):2886–96.
[3] Çetindağ C, Yazıcıoğlu B, Koç A. Named-entity recognition in Turkish legal texts.
Nat Lang Eng 2023;29(3).
[4] Castano S, Falduti M, Ferrara A, Montanelli S. A knowledge-centered framework
for exploration and retrieval of legal documents. Inf Syst 2022;106.
[5] Pozzi R, Moiraghi F, Lodi F, Palmonari M. Evaluation of incremental entity
extraction with background knowledge and entity linking. In: Proceedings of
the 11th international joint conference on knowledge graphs. IJCKG ’22, New
York, NY, USA: ACM; 2023.
[6] Kassner N, Petroni F, Plekhanov M, Riedel S, Cancedda N. EDIN: An end-toend benchmark and pipeline for unknown entity discovery and indexing. In:
Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics; 2022, p. 8659–73.
[7] Heist N, Paulheim H. NASTyLinker: NIL-aware scalable transformer-based entity
linker. In: The Semantic Web, ESWC 2023. Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Springer; 2023, p. 174–91.
[8] McNamee P, Dang HT. Overview of the TAC 2009 knowledge base population
track. In: Second text analysis conference (TAC 2009). Vol. 2, 2009.
[9] Logan IV RL, McCallum A, Singh S, Bikel D. Benchmarking scalable methods
for streaming cross-document entity coreference. In: Proceedings of the 59th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics; 2021, p. 4717–31.
[10] Wu L, Petroni F, Josifoski M, Riedel S, Zettlemoyer L. Scalable zero-shot entity
linking with dense entity retrieval. In: Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). Association for
Computational Linguistics; 2020, p. 6397–407.
[11] Sevgili O, Shelmanov A, Arkhipov MV, Panchenko A, Biemann C. Neural entity
linking: A survey of models based on deep learning. Semantic Web 2020;13.
[12] Wang X, Jiang Y, Bach N, Wang T, Huang Z, Huang F, et al. Automated
concatenation of embeddings for structured prediction. In: Proceedings of the
59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1:
Long Papers). 2021, p. 2643–60.
[13] Devlin J, Chang M-W, Lee K, Toutanova K. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In: Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers).
Association for Computational Linguistics; 2019, p. 4171–86.
[14] Paccosi T, Palmero Aprosio A. KIND: an Italian multi-domain dataset for named
entity recognition. In: Proceedings of the thirteenth language resources and
evaluation conference (LREC). Marseille, France: European Language Resources
Association; 2022, p. 501–7.
[15] He Z, Liu S, Li M, Zhou M, Zhang L, Wang H. Learning entity representation
for entity disambiguation. In: Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers). Association
for Computational Linguistics; 2013, p. 30–4.
13

V. Bellandi et al.

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105904

[55] Manning CD, Surdeanu M, Bauer J, Finkel J, Bethard SJ, McClosky D.
The Stanford CoreNLP natural language processing toolkit. In: Proceedings of
52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System
Demonstrations. 2014, p. 55–60.
[56] Monahan S, Lehmann J, Nyberg T, Plymale J, Jung A. Cross-lingual crossdocument coreference with entity linking. In: Text analysis conference (TAC
2011). 2011.
[57] Cunningham H, Maynard D, Bontcheva K, Tablan V. GATE: an architecture
for development of robust HLT applications. In: Proceedings of the 40th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association
for Computational Linguistics; 2002, p. 168–75.
[58] Bellandi V, Siccardi S. An entity registry model. In: 4th International Conference
on Natural Language Processing, Information Retrieval and AI (NIAI 2023). 2023.
[59] Basile P, Caputo A, Gentile AL, Rizzo G. Overview of the evalita 2016 named
entity recognition and linking in italian tweets (neel-it) task. In: EVALITA.
Evaluation of NLP and Speech Tools for Italian: Proceedings of the Final
Workshop 7 December 2016. 2016, p. 40–7.
[60] Magnini B, Pianta E, Girardi C, Negri M, Romano L, Speranza M, et al. I-CAB:
the Italian content annotation bank. In: Proceedings of the fifth international
conference on language resources and evaluation (LREC’06). European Language
Resources Association (ELRA); 2006.
[61] Rosales-Méndez H, Hogan A, Poblete B. VoxEL: a benchmark dataset for
multilingual entity linking. In: The Semantic Web. ISWC 2018. ISWC 2018.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer; 2018.
[62] Tsai RT-H, Wu S-H, Chou W-C, Lin Y-C, He D, Hsiang J, et al. Various criteria in
the evaluation of biomedical named entity recognition. BMC Bioinform 2006;7.
[63] Muffo M, Bertino E. BERTino: an Italian DistilBERT model. 2023, arXiv:2303.
18121.
[64] Pozzi R, Rubini R, Bernasconi C, Palmonari M. Named Entity Recognition and
Linking for Entity Extraction from Italian Civil Judgements. In: AIxIA 2023 –
Advances in Artificial Intelligence: 22nd International Conference of the Italian
Association for Artificial Intelligence, AIxIA 2023, Rome, Italy, November 6 – 9,
2023, Proceedings, Springer (Forthcoming).
[65] Bianchi F, Palmonari M, Cremaschi M, Fersini E. Actively learning to rank
semantic associations for personalized contextual exploration of knowledge
graphs. In: The Semantic Web. ESWC 2017. Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Springer; 2017, p. 120–35.
[66] Cruz IF, Loprete F, Palmonari M, Stroe C, Taheri A. Pay-as-you-go multiuser feedback model for ontology matching. In: Knowledge Engineering and
Knowledge Management. EKAW 2014. Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Springer; 2014, p. 80–96.
[67] Li G. Human-in-the-loop data integration. Proc. VLDB Endow. 2017;10(12):2006–
17.

[40] Hu W, Zhao S, Zhao Q, Sun H, Hu X, Guo R, et al. BERT_LF: A similar case
retrieval method based on legal facts. Wirel Commun Mob Comput 2022;2022.
[41] Rabelo J, Goebel R, Kim M-Y, et al. Overview and discussion of the competition
on legal information extraction/entailment (COLIEE) 2021. Rev Socionetwork
Strateg 2022;16.
[42] Pauzi Z, Capiluppi A. Applications of natural language processing in software
traceability: A systematic mapping study. J Syst Softw 2023;198.
[43] Breit A, Waltersdorfer L, Ekaputra FJ, Sabou M. An architecture for extracting
key elements from legal permits. In: 2020 IEEE international conference on big
data (big data). 2020, p. 2105–10.
[44] Amato F, Mazzeo A, Penta A, Picariello A. Using NLP and ontologies for notary
document management systems. In: Database and expert systems application,
2008. DEXA’08. 2008, p. 67–71.
[45] Buey MG, Garrido AL, Bobed C, Ilarri S. The AIS project: Boosting information
extraction from legal documents by using ontologies. In: Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference on Agents and Artificial Intelligence (ICAART 2016).
Vol. 2, 2016, p. 438–45.
[46] Ruiz M, Roman C, Garrido AL, Mena E. uAIS: An experience of increasing
performance of NLP information extraction tasks from legal documents in an
electronic document management system. In: Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems (ICEIS 2020). Vol. 1, 2020,
p. 189–96.
[47] Cugno M, Giacomelli S, Malgieri L, Mocetti S, Giuliana Palumbo - Banca d’Italia.
La giustizia civile in Italia: durata dei processi, produttivita degli uffici e stabilita
delle decisioni, in Questioni di Economia e Finanza. 2023.
[48] Jha K, Röder M, Ngonga Ngomo A-C. All that glitters is not gold–rule-based
curation of reference datasets for named entity recognition and entity linking.
In: The Semantic Web. ESWC 2017. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer;
2017.
[49] Braylan A, Alonso O, Lease M. Measuring annotator agreement generally across
complex structured, multi-object, and free-text annotation tasks. In: Proceedings
of the ACM web conference 2022. 2022, p. 1720–30.
[50] Deleger L, Li Q, Lingren T, Kaiser M, Molnar K, Stoutenborough L, et al. Building
gold standard corpora for medical natural language processing tasks. In: AMIA
annual symposium proceedings. American Medical Informatics Association; 2012.
[51] Hripcsak G, Rothschild AS. Agreement, the f-measure, and reliability in
information retrieval. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2005;12(3).
[52] Grouin C, Rosset S, Zweigenbaum P, Fort K, Galibert O, Quintard L. Proposal
for an extension of traditional named entities: From guidelines to evaluation, an
overview. In: Proceedings of the 5th Linguistic Annotation Workshop. 2011, p.
92–100.
[53] Nothman J, Ringland N, Radford W, Murphy T, Curran JR. Learning multilingual named entity recognition from Wikipedia. Artificial Intelligence
2013;194:151–75.
[54] Palmero Aprosio A, Moretti G. Tint 2.0: an all-inclusive suite for NLP in Italian.
In: Proceedings of the Fifth Italian Conference on Computational Linguistics
CLiC-it 2018, Vol. 10. 2018, p. 311–7.

14

