Artificial Intelligence and Law (2021) 29:171–211
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10506-020-09271-3
ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling
Llio Humphreys1 · Guido Boella1 · Leendert van der Torre2 ·
Livio Robaldo2 · Luigi Di Caro1 · Sepideh Ghanavati3 · Robert Muthuri4
Published online: 24 June 2020
© Springer Nature B.V. 2020

Abstract
This article seeks to address the problem of the ‘resource consumption bottleneck’ of
creating legal semantic technologies manually. It describes a semantic role labeling
based information extraction system to extract definitions and norms from legislation
and represent them as structured norms in legal ontologies. The output is intended to
help make laws more accessible, understandable, and searchable in a legal document
management system.
Keywords Classification · Information extraction · Ontology · Normative reasoning ·
Semantic role labeling · Artificial intelligence · Law

1 Introduction
Paper-based laws and regulations are not accessible to most of the population. In many
regions in Europe and beyond, there are now official online portals making laws and
decrees available to all, due in no small part to the momentum gained by the Open
Government Data and Linked Open Data initiatives. However, publishing laws online
does not make them truly accessible. Sartor (2011, page 7), envisages a future legal
semantic web where legal contents on the web will be enriched with machine processable information: “This information will then be automatically presented in many
different ways, according to the different issues at stake and the different roles played
by its users (legislators, judges, administrators, parties in economic or other transactions).” This article endorses the vision of providing machine processable information
about laws suited to the needs of different users. However, the research that is the
subject of this article is informed by the terminological and frame-based legal ontologies of the Eunomos legal document management system (Boella et al. 2012, 2016)
and the Legal-URN compliance management system (Ghanavati 2013) because these
systems show the kind of information required by individuals and organisations from

B Llio Humphreys

humphrey@di.unito.it

Extended author information available on the last page of the article

123

172

L. Humphreys et al.

legislation, and provide suitable representations for structuring norms. These systems
are described in Sect. 4 below.
This article is concerned with a major obstacle to the goal of maintaining legal
information and compliance systems: the ‘resource consumption bottleneck’ (Hepp
2007) of creating semantic technologies manually. The use of automated information
extraction techniques could significantly reduce this bottleneck. However, Lenci et al.
(2009) argue:
Technologies in the area of knowledge management and information access are
confronted with a typical acquisition paradox. As knowledge is mostly conveyed
through text, content access requires understanding the linguistic structures representing content in text at a level of considerable detail. In turn, processing
linguistic structures at the depth needed for content understanding presupposes
that a considerable amount of domain knowledge is already in place.
The research question of this article is: How to address the resource bottleneck
problem of creating specialist knowledge management systems? In particular, how
to semi-automate the extraction of definitions, norms and their elements to populate
legal ontologies?
This article shows that the acquisition paradox can be addressed by combining
state-of-the-art general-purpose natural language processing modules with pre- and
post-processing using rules based on domain knowledge. The output is intended to
help make laws more accessible, understandable and searchable in a legal document
management system. This research is not concerned with automated legal interpretation (e.g. Walton et al. 2016; Malerba 2017) or automated legal reasoning (e.g. Robaldo
et al. 2019; Robaldo and Sun 2017; Governatori et al. 2013). Another limitation is that
this article is concerned with legislation, and not with case law and legal scholarship,
although the approaches proposed could be adopted for such sources in the future.
The article proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a literature review of legal
ontology learning and information extraction. Section 3 provides a summary of semantic role labeling. Section 4 describes relevant features of the systems on which our
ontology population methodology is based. Section 5 describes our methodology for
extracting definitions using semantic role labeling, while Sect. 6 shows how using the
same methodology can be used to classify and extract different types of norms and
their elements. Section 7 provides an evaluation of our approach, while Sect. 8 ends
the article with conclusions and ideas for future work.

2 Legal ontology learning and information extraction
Research on ontology learning (creating new ontologies) and ontology population
(populating existing ones) is an important field of ontology engineering, albeit not
without limitations. Biemann (2005) states that “none of the methods used today are
good enough for creating semantic resources of any kind in a completely unsupervised
fashion, albeit automatic methods can facilitate manual construction to a large extent”.
While ontologies can be learned from structured and unstructured data, most research
on ontology population is based on extracting data from unstructured text.

123

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling

173

Research on extracting simple concepts and their inter-relationships (rather than
definitions) can involve rules or machine learning. Many concepts and ontological
relations can be extracted based on simple patterns. Hearst (1992) used the patterns “X, Ys and other Zs” and “Ws such as X, Y and Z” to extract IS-A relations.
Berland and Charniak (1999) used similar patterns to find PART-OF relations. A
pattern-matching approach was also employed by Walter (2009) and de Maat et al.
(2009) to extract legal definitions from court decisions and legislation respectively. An
alternative approach is semantic clustering. Following from the distributional hypothesis of Harris (1968) that “the meaning of entities, and the meaning of grammatical
relations among them, is related to the restriction of combinations of these entities
relative to other entities”, Hindle’s system classifies words according to their predicateargument structures, i.e. nouns can be classified according to the verbs they occur with,
and verbs according to the nouns they occur with.
For frame-based ontologies, we need to look at information extraction, in particular
template filling. Information extraction from natural text is challenging because of
language variability: the fact that the same information can be expressed with different
words and syntactic constructs. Examples of language variability are lexical synonymy,
syntactic word order and world knowledge inferences.
Traditionally, information extraction is approached in a supervised manner based
on a set of examples expressing the relations or entities and constructed manually. The
Simple Information Extraction (SIE) of Giuliano et al. (2006) is a modular information
extraction system designed to be easily and quickly portable across tasks and domains.
SIE is composed of a general purpose machine learning algorithm, the Support Vector
Machine (SVM), combined with several customisable modules. A crucial role in the
architecture is played by an instance filtering module, which is based on the assumption
that entities to be recognised are unlikely to have low information content (Gliozzo
et al. 2005).
The core of many unsupervised information extraction systems, such as those of
Yangarber et al. (2000) and Stevenson and Greenwood (2005), are ‘paraphrasing’
modules to generate semantically equivalent components with lexical or syntactic
variation. The synonym sets in the WordNet (Miller et al. 1990) general-purpose
lightweight ontology are also very useful for this purpose, and have been used by
Moldovan and Rus (2001) and Mihalcea and Moldovan (2000). Syntactic word order
patterns, such as active/passive formulations can be generated according to standard template rules and grouped together in equivalence classes. The TEASE system
of Szpektor et al. (2004) is a generic paraphrasing extraction system that extracts
relations between a pivot (lexical entry) and a template (dependency parse fragment).
The surrounding words of the lexical entries are used as anchor sets to extract templates.
An alternative approach to handling language variability is the transformation of
text into logical form. The system of Rus (2002) transformed WordNet concept definitions into logical forms designed to be as close as possible to natural language. The
notation module was developed for a question-answering system. The answer extraction procedure consisted of four steps: transforming questions and answers into logic
forms, forming WordNet-based lexical chains between pairs of concepts, unifying
lexical chains, and extracting inferences. The advantage of using logic form transfor-

123

174

L. Humphreys et al.

mation as part of an information extraction system is that the knowledge could be used
by various applications that require different information to be structured in different
ways. However, this approach has already been tried and tested on legal text. Wyner
(2012) explored the use of C&C/Boxer (Curran et al. 2007) to extract norms from
UK citizenship legislation, concluding that such systems perform better on Controlled
English than natural language constructions typically found in legislative text.
Wyner and Peters (2011, 2012) have researched information extraction for legislation and case reports. Their approach is semantic annotation of text, creation of a gold
standard, and development of automated annotation tools. The gold standard requires
annotations from domain experts, and they use the Teamware unified environment
for these tasks. The Teamware system uses the open source General Architecture for
Text Engineering (GATE) tool for information extraction (Cunningham et al. 2002)
to pre-annotate the text, thereby removing some aspects of the annotation task for
domain experts. The GATE platform enables template-based extraction on the basis
of lookup lists (gazetteers), heuristic pattern-based grammars as well as a pipeline of
standard natural language processing components such as tokenization, sentence splitting, part-of-speech tagging, morphological analysis (lemmatisation), verb and noun
phrase chunking, and a parser. A simpler approach is used in the SALEM system (Bartolini et al. 2004), which is tasked with assigning each legislative paragraph a provision
type and automatically tagging the parts of the paragraph with domain-specific semantic roles identifying the legal entities (i.e. actors, actions and properties). The text is
POS-tagged and shallow parsed into chunks. The recognition of provision types and
the subsequent role identification are based on structural patterns which are combined
with lexical conditions (using regular expressions) and dependency relations.
There is much information extraction research involving machine learning in the
legal domain. Of particular relevance to this article is the extraction of active roles,
passive roles and involved objects in norms by Boella et al. (2013b). Based on the idea
that a semantic tag may be characterised by limited sets of syntactic contexts, their
supervised machine learning approach involves the use of syntactic dependencies
extracted with the TULE parser as factors in a Support Vector Machine classifier
(Cortes and Vapnik 1995). Gao and Singh (2014) use pattern-matching and machine
learning to extract commitments, authorisations, powers, prohibitions and sanctions
from business contracts. The objective is similar to Sect. 6 of this article, in that they
first classify the norm type, and then extract the elements of the norm. They identify
norms based on use of modal verbs. They use a classifier for identifying norms using
verb and clause conjunctions. Elements of norms are extracted based on heuristics such
as ‘If a norm sentence has a subordinate clause led by conjunction words such as “if”
and “unless”, the subordinate clause expresses the antecedent.’ Grabmair et al. (2011)
and Biagioli et al. (2005) also use machine learning approaches for classifying norms
and extracting elements of legislation. Their methodology relies on the costly labourintensive task of annotating legal corpora, and is less sensitive to specific linguistic
expressions that are not commonly used in the corpus. Moreover, this makes it more
difficult to fine-tune the extraction process.
Semantic role labeling (see Sect. 3) has emerged as a suitable intermediary for unsupervised information extraction (Surdeanu et al. 2003; Kaisser and Webber 2007). To
be clear, while the identification of general thematic roles is based on a general-purpose

123

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling

175

system trained on a general corpora, the information gained can then be used in a simpler system for domain-specific template filling. However, there is little work on SRL
for information extraction in legal informatics. Venturi et al. (2009) use a FrameNet
based methodology for extracting norms. Their methodology relies on a laborious
methodology of building a legal domain extension to the general FrameNet, and producing a legal corpus annotated with frame information. Palmirani et al. (2011) use
a FrameNet approach to extract suspensions of norms in a three-step process: identification of relevant sentences, syntactic analysis, and semantic annotation using tree
matching. Bertoldi and de Oliveira Chishman (2011) investigated the use of FrameNet
for building a legal ontology for Brazilian law, but decided against it, as they found
that the legal frames were neither language nor jurisdiction independent as intended.
While PropBank semantic role labeling has been used in legal informatics for Abstract
Meaning Representation (AMR) (Viet et al. 2017) and event extraction for legal case
retrieval (Maxwell et al. 2009), the work presented in this article is, to our knowledge,
the first attempt to extract definitions and norms from legislation using a PropBank
semantic role labeler (Kingsbury and Palmer 2002). It is submitted that this approach
could achieve wider coverage than FrameNet (Fillmore et al. 2004), as has been the
observation in other information extraction research (e.g. Kaisser and Webber 2007).
Moreover, the use of shallow rather than deep roles allows for greater flexibility in
the selection and classification of data extracted, tailored to the requirements of the
relevant application.

3 Semantic role labeling
Semantic role labeling (SRL) is the task of detecting basic event structures in a sentence such as “who” did “what” to “whom”, “when” and “where” (Màrquez 2009). A
semantic role (also known as semantic case, thematic role, theta role or case role) is
the underlying relationship that a participant has with the main verb in a clause (Loos
et al. 2004; Payne 1997).
Many verbs allow a variable number of semantic roles to be realized in various
syntactic positions (diathesis alternations), as can be seen in the following example
from Martin and Jurafsky (2016):
[John/AGENT] broke [the window/THEME].
[John/AGENT] broke [the window/THEME] with
[a rock/INSTRUMENT].
[The rock/INSTRUMENT] broke [the window/THEME].
[The window/THEME] broke.
[The window/THEME] was broken by [John/AGENT].
While an agent or instrument can both be the grammatical subjects of a sentence,
a sentence such as the following is grammatically unacceptable:
John and a hammer broke the window.
Fillmore (1968) explained why: only noun phrases representing the same case may
be conjoined. Fillmore used the term ‘case’ with reference to the case system that

123

176

L. Humphreys et al.

exist in many languages. For instance, in ancient Greek or Russian, the phrase ‘with
a rock’ in the sentence “John broke the window with a rock” would be expressed
with a single noun with the instrumental case marker, which is different from the
nominative case used for “John”. In English, the instrumental case is ‘flagged’ by the
preposition ‘with’. However, there is no rigid one-to-one mapping between flags and
cases—‘with’ can also flag the cases ‘Manner’ (‘with glee’) and ‘Accompanier’ (‘with
Nadia’) (Hirst 1992). Levin (1993) noted that syntactic constraints on verbs and the
arguments they may take are semantically determined, and created verb classes whose
members pattern together with respect to diathesis alternations.
There is no consensus on a definitive list of semantic roles (Màrquez et al. 2008) that
should be used for semantic role labeling. In FrameNet (Fillmore et al. 2004), which is
based on frame semantics (Fillmore 1976), arguments are related to deep roles related
to specific scenarios or frames, such as Suspect, Authorities and Offense. PropBank
(Kingsbury and Palmer 2002), on the other hand, uses general roles and verb-specific
roles based on the verb classes of Levin (1993). The roles are numbered, rather than
given semantic names, although in general, Arg-0 corresponds to Agent while Arg-1
corresponds to Patient. Both FrameNet and PropBank use extra-thematic elements
such as Time, Manner and Place. Màrquez et al. (2008) assert that most research on
SRL is now conducted on PropBank, mainly because of its greater coverage. While
the FrameNet corpus is a selection of illustrative sentences, PropBank has annotated
the semantic roles of all verbs in the Penn Treebank II Wall Street Journal Corpus
(Marcus et al. 1994).
SRL systems rely on automated part-of-speech tagging and parsing. Most SRL systems use constituency parsers, probably because they have traditionally been better
resourced for the English language. However, Johansson and Nugues (2008a, b) argue
that dependency structures offer a more transparent encoding of predicate argument
relations (e.g. grammatical function such as subject and object is an integral concept in
dependency syntax) and thus dependency structures are more suitable for explaining
the syntax-semantics interface (Mel’cuk 1988; Hudson 1984). Moreover, in their comparison of constituent-based and dependency-based SRL systems for FrameNet, they
found that their performance was roughly the same, except that dependency-based
systems outperformed constituent-based systems when using out-of-domain test sets,
due to their lesser reliance on lexical features (Johansson and Nugues 2008b). Another
reason for choosing SRL systems based on dependency parsers is that they can be more
efficient (Ciaramita et al. 2008), rendering them more suitable for real-life applications
(Surdeanu et al. 2008).
Most automated SRL systems follow this three step architecture:
– filtering (or pruning) the set of argument candidates for a given predicate;
– local scoring of argument candidates for possible role labels, including a ‘noargument’ label;
– joint scoring to combine the predictions of local scorers and ensure that the eventual
labeling satisfies structural and SRL-dependent constraints.
The Mate Tools semantic role labeler (Björkelund et al. 2009) used for this article
follows this architecture. The first stage consists of a pipeline of independent classifiers. It carries out the predicate disambiguation with a set of greedy classifiers, where

123

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling

177

one classifier is applied per predicate lemma. It then uses a beam search to identify
the arguments of each predicate and to label them, yielding a pool of candidate propositions. The second stage consists of a reranker that is applied to the candidates using
local models and proposition features. It combines the score of the greedy classifiers
and the reranker in a third stage to select the best candidate proposition. Mate Tools
came second in the CoNLL-2009 shared SRL task on the joint parsing of syntactic
and semantic dependencies in the closed challenge (Hajič et al. 2009), and is freely
available to download or use via an online demo.
The definition and norm extraction system is based on abstract semantic representations from a general-purpose SRL module, as well as dependency parse trees from
the same system. This simplifies the sets of rules required which in cascade identify
possible norms and definitions, classify their types, and then on the basis of their types,
map arguments in a semantic role tree to domain-specific slots in a legal ontology. The
use of an abstract semantic representation also allows flexibility in the determination
of how norms are structured so that the system can easily be modified for different
applications. To evaluate the definitions and norm extraction system, the system was
tested on both seen and unseen data from a corpus of EU Directives.

4 Systems on which ontology population methodology is based
The research that is the subject of this article is highly influenced by the European
Legal Taxonomy Syllabus (Ajani et al. 2016) lightweight ontology framework, the
terminological and frame-based legal ontologies of Eunomos legal document management system (Boella et al. 2012, 2016) and Legal-URN compliance management
system (Ghanavati 2013) because these systems show the kind of information required
by individuals and organisations from legislation, and provide suitable representations
for structuring norms. This section describes the systems that inspired this research
(Fig. 1, 2, 3).
4.1 European Legal Taxonomy Syllabus
European Legal Taxonomy Syllabus (Ajani et al. 2016) was developed in the context
of the UT (Uniform Terminology For European Private Law) project (Ajani and Ebers
2005; Rossi and Vogel 2004). The research network involved researchers from 7 universities spread across England, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Poland, and
Spain. The aims were better understanding of the historical divergences hampering uniform terminology, and the promotion of a common terminology in EU private law. The
motivation for the development of a multilingual legal ontology framework was that
anyone involved in trans-national activities would benefit from access to user-friendly
specialist ontologies to manage the deep, complex and interconnected terminology
required for understanding laws in different jurisdictions. A legal ontology framework that handles these issues could be useful for many different types of users e.g.
lawyers who deal with cross-border issues, international financial institutions, or EU
translators.

123

178

L. Humphreys et al.

Fig. 1 The mapping in ELTS of European legal terms to national legal terms in Italy and England & Wales

The main assumptions of the European Legal Taxonomy Syllabus ontology framework come from studies in comparative law (Rossi and Vogel 2004) and ontologies
engineering (Klein 2001). European Legal Taxonomy Syllabus (ELTS) is based on a
clear distinction between a legal term and a legal concept. The concepts are arranged
into ontologies. Lexical terms are then linked to all concepts that apply. Making a
clear distinction among terms and their interlingual acceptions (or axes) is a standard
way to properly manage large multilingual lexical databases (Sérasset 1995; Lyding
et al. 2006). This approach is also well suited to complex interlinking domains. The
system does not assume the existence of a single taxonomy covering all languages
since different national systems may organize legal concepts in different ways. It is a
framework of interlinked but separate ontologies for different languages and jurisdictions in Europe.
The challenge in developing European Legal Taxonomy Syllabus was to design
an ontology framework that captures the complex factors that influence the meaning
of legal terms, but at the same time structures that knowledge in a way that leads to
clarity rather than confusion. ELTS is not a formal ontology in the standard sense, i.e.
an axiomatic ontology formalized, for instance, in description logic (Palmirani et al.
2018). Rather, it is a lightweight ontology, i.e. a knowledge base storing low-level
legal concepts, connected via low-level semantic relations, and related to linguistic
patterns that denote legal concepts.
For the end-user, each term in each ontology is presented in an associated information table with the following information:
– language
– jurisdiction
– domain
– description in natural language
– references to legislative definitions

123

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling

179

Fig. 2 European Legal Taxonomy Syllabus within the Eunomos system

– links from national terms (and their definitions) to European ones and vice versa
– links to equivalent terms in other languages
– a list of other terms having the same meaning
– an ontology graph showing parent and child concepts
– notes
The descriptions in natural language are made by legal experts who seek to explain
but do not over-simplify legal issues. The notes field carries information about court
decisions, scholarly interpretations or other information of interest.
Each ontology within European Legal Taxonomy Syllabus ontology is hierarchical and the conceptual tree allows users to view hyperonomy/meronomy/ synonomy
relations. Figure 2 shows a concept tree for vehicles with the hyponyms being trolleybuses, motorcycles etc.
The ELTS bottom-up approach is suitable for dealing with legal interpretation
and the evolution of terms. As more legislation-specific definitions about terms are
collected, it becomes possible to find common attributes and derive a more general
definition. The general definition is then linked to all the definitions that informed it
via a group_by relation. Legislation-specific and generic definitions can co-exist, with
generic definitions grouping legislative definitions together with doctrinal interpretation.
Another important issue is that when new legislation is approved and enacted, it can
introduce a number of new definitions which render old definitions obsolete. ELTS

123

180

L. Humphreys et al.

handles this issue by introducing a temporal dimension into the ontology, allowing
new concepts to replace old ones while still retaining the old concepts in the system
for reference purposes. This is achieved with the replaced_by relation.
For the UT project, terms were collected in a database together with the legal
sources where they appeared, in order to identify the concepts. Then, for each different
ontology (i.e., each specific language ontology and the general EU ontology), the set
of concepts were organized by legal experts into ontologies which can be different for
different legal traditions. The result is lightweight rather than axiomatic ontologies.
The function of these ontologies is to compare the taxonomic structure in the different
legislation, and to provide a form of intelligent indexing.
The ELTS ontology framework is well-integrated within the Eunomos legal document management system described below, so that links can be made between
concepts, the terms used to express the concepts, and items of the laws that feature
the terms. Vice versa, terms in the text of legislation are annotated with references to
the concepts.
4.2 Eunomos
The second system of relevance is Eunomos—a legal knowledge document management system to help users keep track of the law and ever-changing legal obligations
(Boella et al. 2016). The Eunomos system is envisaged as being useful to a wide range
of user groups but is targeted towards compliance officers in the first instance, because
they have the greatest need and enthusiasm for a system of this kind. The basic idea
of Eunomos is to create a stricter coupling between legal knowledge and its legislative sources, associating the concepts of its legal ontology with regulations structured
using legislative XML. The system takes inspiration from technologies developed in
the related fields of legal ontologies, extending the European Legal Taxonomy Syllabus
(Ajani et al. 2016) tool for building legal ontologies, and legislative drafting for parliaments (so-called legislative XML). Maintaining laws in XML format makes it easier
for Eunomos to extract elements such as paragraphs, articles and references, so that
knowledge engineers can categorise and annotate the elements and lawyers can view
specific relevant information. Most laws are collected from portals by means of web
spiders, but they can also be inserted into the database via a web interface. Eunomos
uses the XML Leges Linker tool developed by ITTIG1 to find cross-references, a
rule-based system (Robaldo et al. 2011) for mining concepts in legal documents, and
a statistical system (Boella et al. 2013a) [developed in the European project EUCases2
(Boella et al. 2015)] for classifying legal documents with EuroVoc labels.3
In Eunomos, the European Legal Taxonomy Syllabus ontology framework is
extended to include prescriptive norms (as opposed to merely terminological definitions found in constitutive norms). A prescription is treated as a composite type
of concept, which is subject to all the relations of simple concepts (is_a, part_of,
replaced_by etc.), but with additional characteristics. Each prescription is necessarily
1 www.xmleges.org.
2 http://www.eucases.eu.
3 https://op.europa.eu/en/web/eu-vocabularies.

123

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling

181

connected to relevant concepts defined in the terminological ontology via the following
relations:
– Deontic clause: the type of prescription: obligation, prohibition, permission, exception.
– Active role: the addressee of the norm (e.g. director, employee).
– Passive role: the beneficiary of the norm (e.g. customer).
– Description: the prescription reworded as necessary to aid comprehension.
– Norm Identifier: hyperlink to relevant provision in the source document.
– Violation: the crime or tort resulting from violation (often defined in other legislation such as a Penal Code.
– Sanction: the sanction resulting from violation (e.g., a fine of 1 ‘quote’, where
‘quote’ is defined in other legislation).
– Notes: information about court decisions, scholarly interpretations or other information of interest.
Prescriptions are a powerful way to structure information about norms that are
usually scattered across different sections, not necessarily from the same piece of
legislation. It makes it easy for users to quickly find norms according to various
search criteria indicated by the above relations. For instance, a semantic search for
prescriptions that relate to sellers will also bring up prescriptions for traders (the
grandparent of seller in the terminological ontology).
The ontology of prescriptions can also show different interpretations of the same
norm. Although Eunomos is a lightweight ontology, and lacks formal semantics,
there is an alternative relation available for prescriptions, inspired from specifications
hierarchies where specifications of a concept can be labelled as disjoint. Alternative
interpretations should be specified as being candidate or non-candidate, where in the
latter case the company has determined that the interpretation is unlikely, undesirable
or irrelevant.
4.3 Legal-URN
The final system of interest is Legal-URN (Ghanavati 2013), a sophisticated system
for systematic modelling and analysis of compliance issues that enables business users
to factor in legal requirements as part of their strategic planning. The system is based
on a Requirements Engineering (RE) approach to legal compliance, and models legal
norms in the same notation as goal and business process management, albeit with
deontic extensions. Legal-URN supports business process compliance by extending
the model-based compliance framework based on the User Requirements Notation
(URN) Language (ITU-T 2012).
The Legal-URN framework, has four layers for legal and organisational models:
1. Official source documents that define the legislation on one side and organisational structures, policies and processes on the other side.
2. A Hohfeldian model [as expressed by Siena (2010)] which consists of a set of
Hohfeldian statements (Wenar 2011) of norms including structured elements of
legal statements.

123

182

L. Humphreys et al.

Fig. 3 Hohfeldian model structure and mapping with Legal-GRL in Legal-URN

3. Goal models based on URN’s Goal-oriented Requirement Language (GRL),
which capture the objectives and requirements of both organisation and legislation.
4. Business process models based on URN’s Use Case Maps (UCM), which define
the business processes that implement organisational policies on the one hand and
represents steps mandated by legislation on the other hand.
To build the Hohfeldian model, the following rules need to be considered:
1. Each legal statement shall be atomic. This means that each legal statement
contains one actor  (the subject), one modalver b, one to many Clause
(ver b & action), 0 to many optional cr ossr e f er ence, 0 to many optional
 pr econdition and 0 to many optional exception.
2. If a legal statement contains more than one modal verb, it must be broken down
into atomic statements.
Then, the Hofeldian classifications (i.e. duty-claim, privilege-noclaim, etc.) are
transformed into Permissions and Obligations and the Legal-GRL model of regulation and the GRL model of organization are developed. GRL’s main concepts come
from management and from socio-technical systems and include actors, which have
intentional elements (goals, softgoals, tasks, and resources) and indicators, linked
through various relationships (AND/OR decompositions, dependencies, and weighted
contributions (Cai and Yu 2002). The compliance analysis is done in this step.
While the Goal-oriented Requirement Language (GRL) models the “why” aspect
of requirements, Use Case Maps (UCM) model “what” aspects with scenarios (use
cases).
Legal-URN has some limitations. The framework does not include a regulations
repository. Furthermore, developing the Hohfeldian model is currently manual. It also
lacks legal interpretations (Bobbitt 2006) to help identify sets of business process patterns which can be legally compliant. Integration with the Eunomos system described
above would solve these problems, as described by Boella et al. (2014).
The Eunomos repository of laws—with legislative XML for clickable crossreferences, definitions of terms and their inter-relationships in specialist ontologies—

123

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling

183

Table 1 Integration of prescriptions and Hohfeldian models
Prescriptions

Hohfeldian model

Integrated representation

Deontic clause

Hohfeldian modality

Hohfeldian modality

Active role

Subject

Responsible actor

Passive role

–

Beneficiary

Violation

–

Violation

Sanction

–

Sanction

–

Modal verb

–

Description

Clause

Clause

–

Precondition

Precondition

–

–

Postcondition

IsA relation

–

IsA relation

PartOf relation

–

PartOf relation

Exception relation

Exception

Exception relation

Norm identifier

Section + article

Norm identifier

–

Cross-reference

Cross-reference

–

–

Stakeholder

replaces the Legal-URN “Law and Regulation Documents” level. At the legal
provisions level, there is a new representation that integrates Eunomos prescriptions
and Legal-URN Hohfeldian models. Table 1 shows the mapping of fields and relations between the two representations. Many fields can be mapped directly, some
require adaptation, and others are taken from one representation.
The ontology structures described above were used as a baseline for developing
the ontology population methodology. However, when developing the system, it was
found that there were some differences in the types of definitions and norms found in
the corpus, and the extraction tool was modified accordingly.

5 Extracting deﬁnitions
Populating a legal ontology based on a bottom-up approach necessarily involves the
laborious task of storing definitions from all relevant legislation. This section describes
how this work can be facilitated with NLP. While most definitions are in the Definitions section of the legislation and follow the regular ‘definiendum equals definiens’
form, there are other less obvious definitions, often found in the normative provisions,
which are highly influential. Section 5.1 provides the general methodology. Section
5.2 provides descriptions of each type of definition and how they are extracted.
5.1 Methodology
To extract definitions, sets of rules were devised which in cascade identify possible
norms and definitions, classify their types, and then on the basis of their types, use fur-

123

184

L. Humphreys et al.

Table 2 Description of the fields (columns) of a Mate Tools SRL output table
Field #

Name

Description

1

ID

Token counter, starting at 1 for each new sentence

2

FORM

Form or punctuation symbol (the token; “split” for English)

3

LEMMA

Gold-standard lemma of FORM

4

PLEMMA

Automatically predicted lemma of FORM

5

POS

Gold-standard POS (major POS only)

6

PPOS

Automatically predicted major POS by a language-specific tagger

7

FEAT

Gold-standard morphological features (if applicable)

8

PFEAT

Automatically predicted morphological features (if applicable)

9

HEAD

Gold-standard syntactic head of the current token (ID or 0 if root)

10

PHEAD

Automatically predicted syntactic head

11

DEPREL

Gold-standard syntactic dependency relation (to HEAD)

12

PDEPREL

Automatically predicted dependency relation to PHEAD

13

FILLPRED

Contains ‘Y’ for argument-bearing tokens

14

PRED

(sense) identifier of a semantic “predicate” coming from a current token

15...

APREDn

Columns with argument labels for each semantic predicate (in the ID order)

ther rules to map arguments in a Mate Tools semantic role labeler (SRL) (Björkelund
et al. 2009) semantic role tree to domain-specific slots in a legal ontology. The idea
behind using SRL is that it enriches a sentence parse tree with useful semantic information (Table 2), creating an abstraction of the parse tree, thereby simplifying the
number of rules to be devised.
The input to the SRL is normalised text of legislation. The normalisation module is
limited to making legislative text akin to standard written text to facilitate information
extraction.
The normalisation module uses pattern-matching and the Brill (1992) part-ofspeech tagger in the Python Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK) by Bird (2006) to
perform the following tasks:
– sentence and word segmentation (with identification of abbreviations, Unique
Resource Locations (URLs), reference numbers, and dates)
– identify titles (uppercase or lacking verb)
– identify and transform references into processable units
– transform certain words to enable SRL handling
– identify lists (and their nestedness) and transform the lists into proper grammatical
sentences, by adding introductory clauses and endings to each list item
– concatenate elements of citations e.g. ‘S_Article_2’ to avoid parsing errors
The normalised text is then transformed into an input file with a word index and word
surface on each line. The output is a table of semantic role dependencies, in accordance
with the specification of The CoNLL-2009 Shared Task (Hajič et al. 2009).
The information extraction system relies on three sets of rules for extracting definitions:

123

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling

185

– the first set identifies sentences that contain definition by looking for dependency
paths to relevant predicates;
– given the definition sentences identified in the first set, the second set of rules the
type of definition;
– given the definitions and definition type, the third set map roles in the SRL tree to
ontology slots relevant to the type of definition.
Below we discuss the different types of definitions and the rules for extracting them.
5.2 Definition types
5.2.1 Regular definitions
The vast majority of definitions constitute a ‘definiendum equals definiens’ formula,
with the ‘equals’ part expressed in a limited number of set patterns.
Here is one example from Directive 98/5/EC.4
For the purposes of this Directive: ‘host Member State’
means the Member State in which a lawyer practises
pursuant to this Directive;
This sentence is identified as a definition whenever the word ‘means’ appears with
the part-of-speech VBZ.
Figure 4 shows the arguments available for extraction from the above example
sentence.5 The definiendum and definiens are extracted in accordance with SRL roles.
For regular definitions, the Definition is the A1 (SBJ) of the relevant predicate (usually
a verb), the Definiens is the A1 (OBJ) and Reason is AM-ADV (ADV). Note that in
addition to the traditional ‘Definition’ and ‘Definiens’ elements found in all ontologies,
we also have the element ‘Scope’.
The XML output for the purpose of populating the ontology is then:
<Norm>
<NormType>Definition</NormType>
<Definiendum>host Member State</Definiendum>
<Definiens>
the Member State in which a lawyer practises
pursuant to this Directive
</Definiens>
<Scope>for the purposes of this Directive</Scope>
</Norm>
Based on analysis of the training corpus, the following patterns of parser dependencies were collated for the predicates used for regular definitions (where −> indicates
sequence and bracketed items are parts of speech):
4 Directive 98/5/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 to facilitate practice
of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the qualification
was obtained.
5 In a pre-processing step, each ‘is’ has been converted into ‘become’ to obtain the best SRL results.

123

186

L. Humphreys et al.

Fig. 4 SRL extraction of a regular definition

– Head −> means (VBZ)
– Head −> any sequence of words −> means (VBZ)
– Head −> shall (MD) −> mean
– Head −> constitutes (any POS)
– Head −> any sequence of words −> defined (any POS)
In general, the part of speech is added as a criteria only when there is potential for
error (for instance, ‘means’ as a noun, as in ‘means of transport’, has an altogether
different meaning to ‘means’ as a verb). Otherwise, parser errors could unnecessarily
degrade the performance of this module.
5.2.2 Include/exclude definitions
Another kind of definition found in the corpus is one that states which items are
included or excluded under a particular category. Include/example definitions are often
used to emphasise the inclusion or exclusion of certain items where this would otherwise be uncertain or even surprising. Include/exclude definitions are not explanatory
like regular definitions, although often appended to regular explanatory definitions.
Moreover, include/exclude definitions are incomplete. There may (or may not) be other
items that are included and/or not included. Include definitions can easily be represented in an ontology as a ‘kind-of’ relation. More difficult are exclude definitions.
An absence of a kind-of relation is not enough: in the example below, ‘the provision
of services’ is not a type of ‘practice of the profession of lawyer’, but then neither is
the sun or the moon.
Below is an example of an exclude definition from Directive 98/5/EC.6
Practice of the profession of lawyer within the meaning
6 Directive 98/5/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 to facilitate practice
of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the qualification
was obtained.

123

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling

187

of this Directive shall not include the provision of
services, which is covered by Directive 77/249/EEC.
The system extracts include/exclude definitions that have the following patterns of
parser dependencies:
– Head −> includes (any POS)
– Head −> do (any POS) −> include (VB)
– Head −> does (any POS) −> include (VB)
– Head −> can (MD) −> include (VB)
– Head −> may (MD) −> include (VB)
– Head −> excludes (any POS)
– Head −> do (any POS) −> exclude (VB)
– Head −> does (any POS) −> exclude (VB)
– Head −> can (MD) −> exclude (VB)
– Head −> may (MD) −> exclude (VB)
For this type of definition (unlike regular definitions), the A2 (SBJ) and A1 (OBJ)
arguments of the word ‘include’ are extracted and assigned to the fields ‘Definiendum’
and ‘Excludes’ (or ‘Includes’) respectively. All the roles for ‘include’ are displayed
below in XML:
<SRL>
<PREDICATE>include</PREDICATE>
<A2>
Practice of the profession of lawyer
</A2>
<AM-MOS>shall</AM-MOD>
<AM-NEG>not</AM-NEG>
<A1>
the provision of services, which becomes
covered by S_E77_F249_FEEC.
</A1>
</SRL>
Manipulation of the first argument allows us to extract the ‘Scope’ argument. Here
is the structured norm in XML after mapping SRL roles to ontology fields:
<Norm>
<NormType>Definition</NormType>
<Definiendum>
practice of the profession of lawyer
</Definiendum>
<Scope>within the meaning of this Directive</Scope>
<Excludes>
the provision of services, which is covered by
Directive 77/249/EEC.
</Excludes>
</Norm>

123

188

L. Humphreys et al.

Include/exclude definitions often occur within sections other than that entitled ‘Definitions’. While these may be not have the status of ‘official’ definition, they do provide
an important indication of the intentions of the legislature, and therefore are likely to
be influential. As such, they are important to include in the ontology. Here is one such
example from Directive 2004/108/EC.7
Member States are responsible for ensuring that
radiocommunications, including radio broadcast reception
and the amateur radio service operating in accordance
with International Telecommunication Union (ITU) radio
regulations, electrical supply networks and
telecommunications networks, as well as equipment
connected thereto, are protected against
electromagnetic disturbance.
As with the exclude definition, the A2 (SBJ) and A1 (OBJ) arguments of the word
‘include’ are extracted and assigned to the fields ‘Definiendum’ and ‘Includes’ respectively. The roles for the predicate ‘include’ are:
<SRL>
<PREDICATE>include</PREDICATE>
<A2>radiocommunications</A2>
<A1>
radio broadcast reception and the amateur radio
service operating in accordance with
International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
radio regulations, electrical supply networks and
telecommunications networks, as well as
equipment connected thereto
</A1>
<C-A2>,</C-A2>
</SRL>
Further work is needed to separate the elements mentioned for the structured norm:
<Norm>
<NormType>Definition</NormType>
<Definiendum>
radiocommunications
</Definiendum>
<Includes>
radio broadcast reception and the amateur radio
service operating in accordance with International
Telecommunication Union (ITU) radio regulations
</Includes>
<Includes>
electrical supply networks
7 Directive 2004/108/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 December 2004 on the
approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to electromagnetic compatibility and repealing
Directive 89/336/EEC Text with EEA relevance.

123

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling

189

</Includes>
<Includes>
telecommunications networks
</Includes>
<Includes>
equipment connected thereto
</Includes>
</Norm>

5.2.3 Definition by example
Legislation also sometimes contain definitions by example, such as the example below
from Directive 98/5/EC.8
For the purpose of this Directive: ‘‘signature-creation
data’’ means unique data, such as codes or private
cryptographic keys, which are used by the signatory to
create an electronic signature;
Such definitions are also not explanatory. They are somewhat similar to include
definitions except that in this case the instances are typical, and therefore invite extension by analogy. Unlike include/exclude definitions, there is a sense of completeness,
that the instances must belong either to the examples or something similar. What is
implied in the example above is the following:
<Norm>
<NormType>Definition</NormType>
<Definiendum>
signature-creation data
</Definiendum>
<Scope>this Directive</Scope>
<Definiens>
unique data which are used by the signatory to
create an electronic signature
</Definiens>
<Includes>codes</Includes>
<Includes>private cryptographic keys</Includes>
<Includes>anything similar to codes</Includes>
<Includes>
anything similar to private cryptographic
keys
</Includes>
</Norm>
For brevity and ease of readability, an Example tag may be preferred for a
lightweight ontology with an XML output as follows:
8 Directive 98/5/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 to facilitate practice
of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the qualification
was obtained.

123

190

L. Humphreys et al.

<Norm>
<NormType>Definition</NormType>
<Definiendum>
signature-creation data
</Definiendum>
<Scope>this Directive</Scope>
<Definiens>
unique data which are used by the signatory to
create an electronic signature
</Definiens>
<Example>codes</Example>
<Example>private cryptographic keys</Example>
</Norm>
Due to time constraints, definitions by example were not extracted for the purpose
of this article, and remains the subject of future work.
5.2.4 Definition by reference
Not every piece of legislation contains every concept, and some legislation explicitly
refer to other legislation for definitions of certain concepts. This is an example from
Directive 98/44/EC:9
The concept of ‘plant variety’ is defined by Article 5 of
Regulation (EC) No 2100/94.
It is important to store these definitions, otherwise some other definition might be
assumed instead. The references can be resolved within the context of the ontology - by
linking to the definition entry or copying its content, depending on the functionalities
of the system. For this research, the IE extractor outputs the elements in XML format
as before. Each reference is converted into a one-word format, which makes it not only
less error-prone for the semantic role labeler, but also easier to convert into legislative
XML URNs (Unique Resource Name). They are not converted directly into URNs but
rather into a different one-word-format that retains topographic information so that
they can be converted back into the original format if necessary.
Here are the SRL roles for ‘define’:
<SRL>
<PREDICATE>define</PREDICATE>
<A1>The concept of plant variety</A1>
<AM-MNR>by S_E_LEC_RNo2100_F94</AM-MNR>
</SRL>
The XML output for ontology population is as follows.
<Norm>
9 Directive 98/44/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 1998 on the legal protection
of biotechnological inventions.

123

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling

191

<NormType>Definition</NormType>
<Definiendum>plant variety</Definiendum>
<Definiens> S_Article_5_of_Regulation_
(_EC_)_No_2100/94</Definiens>
</Norm>

6 Extracting norms
Section 5 discussed extracting definitions to populate a legal terminological ontology.
This section describes the extraction and structuring of norms to populate a framebased ontology of norms (although strictly speaking, definitions are also norms and are
found in the normative provisions section of EU legislation). The Eunomos ontology
of legal norms and Legal-URN Hohfeldian model present norms in a structured,
searchable and intuitive format for representing who must (or may) do what and
when. The focus on actions in norms renders this work particularly suitable for a
dependency parsing and semantic role labeling approach. Section 6.1 provides the
general methodology. Section 6.2 provides descriptions of each type of definition and
how they are extracted.
6.1 Methodology
The methodology for extracting norms is essentially the same as described in Sect. 5.
In addition to the three sets of rules for identifying sentences containing norms, the
norm type, and the roles in the SRL tree to map to slots in a legal ontology, further
rules are needed for extracting nested norms, conditions, exceptions, etc.
Section 6 describes the different types of norms. Here are presented the rules for
extracting them. In this section, we will mostly show the relevant SRL output in XML
format as the sentences are typically too long to display as per the visualisation tool.
6.2 Types of norms
6.2.1 Obligation
Consider for example the passive sentence below from 2007/60/EC,10 which represents an obligation:
Hence, objectives regarding the management of flood risks
should be determined by the Member States themselves and
should be based on local and regional circumstances.
Figure 5 shows that the SRL tool understands that the agents (role A0) are the
Member States, relegating the objectives to the object (A1) role of the verb ‘determine’.
Moreover, it also abstracts from the fact that the root of the parse tree is the modal verb
followed by an auxiliary. Thus it becomes simpler to write rules on the SRL output
than on the parse tree.
10 Directive 2007/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2007 on the assessment and management of flood risks (Text with EEA relevance).

123

192

L. Humphreys et al.

Fig. 5 SRL extraction of a passive obligation

Fig. 6 SRL extraction of an active obligation

The XML output is:
<Norm>
<NormType>Obligation</NormType>
<ActiveRole>Member States themselves</ActiveRole>
<Action>objectives regarding the management of flood risk
should be determined and should be based on local
and regional circumstances</Action>
</Norm>

If we convert this sentence to an active sentence, the elements extracted are practically the same (Fig. 6).
Hence, Member States themselves should determine objectives
regarding the management of flood risks based on local and
regional circumstances.

6.2.2 Right
Here is an example from Directive 98/5/EC:11
11 Directive 98/5/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 to facilitate
practice of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the
qualification was obtained.

123

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling

193

Any lawyer shall be entitled to pursue on a permanent basis, in
any other Member State under his home-country professional title,
the activities specified in Article 5.

The path to root is [[u‘shall’, u‘MD’, 2], [u‘become’, u‘VB’, 3], [u‘entitled’,
u‘VBN’, 4]]. The word ‘be’ has been transformed in a pre-processing step to ‘become’
to facilitate semantic role labeling. Note that the modal verb ‘shall’ is usually associated with an Obligation norm type. However, there are specific patterns such as ‘shall
be entitled’ or ‘shall be granted’ that indicate a Right rather than Obligation. The
module looks for such exceptional patterns, based on the corpus used to develop the
system.
The relevant SRL roles for the predicate ‘entitled’ are as follows:
<SRL>
<PREDICATE>Right</PREDICATE>
<A2:SBJ>Any lawyer<A2:SBJ>
<A1:OPRD>
to pursue on a permanent basis, in any other Member
State under his home-country professional title,
the activities specified in S_A5
</A1:OPRD>
</SRL>
<Norm>
<NormType>Right</NormType>
<ActiveRole>Any lawyer</ActiveRole>
<Action>
to pursue on a permanent basis, in any other Member
State under his home-country professional title,
the activities specified in Article 5
</Action>
</Norm>
6.2.3 Permission
Here is an example from Directive 98/5/EC:12
A lawyer registered in a host Member State under his
home-country professional title may practise as a
salaried lawyer in the employ of another lawyer, an
association or firm of lawyers, or a public or private
enterprise to the extent that the host Member State so
permits for lawyers registered under the professional
title used in that State.
12 Directive 98/5/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 to facilitate
practice of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the
qualification was obtained.

123

194

L. Humphreys et al.

The modal verb ‘may’ as head of the sentence indicates that the type of norm is a
Permission. The verb ‘practice’ is dependent on the head, and used as the ‘predicate’
from which to extract arguments for the ontology:
<SRL>
<PREDICATE>practice</PREDICATE>
<A0:SBJ>
A lawyer registered in a host Member State under
his home-country professional title
</A0:SBJ>
<A2:ADV>
practise as a salaried lawyer in the employ of
another lawyer, an association or firm of lawyers,
or a public or private enterprise, to the extent
that the host Member State so permits for lawyers
registered under the professional title used in
that State
</A2:ADV>
</SRL>
The keywords ‘to the extent’ in the A2 argument triggers a rule to extract the
condition. The rule states that the condition includes the trigger words and all the
words that follow up to a comma, semi-colon or full stop.
<Norm>
<NormType>Permission</NormType>
<ActiveRole>
A lawyer registered in a host Member State
under his home-country professional title
<ActiveRole>
<Action>
practise as a salaried lawyer in the employ of
another lawyer, an association or firm of lawyers,
or a public or private enterprise
</Action>
<Condition>
to the extent that the host Member State so permits
for lawyers registered under the professional title
used in that State
</Condition>
</Norm>
In the example below, on the other hand, arguments from the SRL output are joined
together. Here is the original norm from Directive 98/5/EC:13
One or more lawyers who belong to the same grouping in their
13 Directive 98/5/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 to facilitate
practice of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the
qualification was obtained.

123

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling

195

home Member State and who practise under their home-country
professional title in a host Member State may pursue their
professional activities in a branch or agency of their
grouping in the host Member State.

The SRL arguments for the predicate ‘pursue’ are as follows:
<SRL>
<A0:SBJ>
One or more lawyers who belong to the same grouping in
their home Member State and who practise under their
home-country professional title in a host Member State
</A0:SBJ>
<A1:OBJ>pursue their professional activities</A1:OBJ>
<AM-LOC:LOC>
in a branch or agency of their grouping in the
host Member State
</AM-LOC:LOC>
</SRL>

Joining the A1 and AM-LOC arguments together we get the following structured
norm:
<Norm>
<NormType<Permission</NormType>
<ActiveRole>
One or more lawyers who belong to the same grouping in
their home Member State and who practise under their
home-country professional title in a host Member State
</ActiveRole>
<Action>
pursue their professional activities in a branch or
agency of their grouping in the host Member State
</Action>
</Norm>

6.2.4 Power
Here is an example from Directive 98/5/EC:14
It may require that, when presented by the competent
authority of the some Member State, the certificate be not
more than three months old.

The path to the tree, [[‘may’, ‘MD’, 1], [‘require’, ‘VB’, 2]], is an instance of a rule
that identifies a path [[‘may’, MD],[‘require’, ANYPOS]] as a candidate for argument
extraction, and identifies this as a pattern of a Power. Note that the modal verb ‘may’ is
14 Directive 98/5/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 to facilitate
practice of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the
qualification was obtained.

123

196

L. Humphreys et al.

not in itself an indication of a Power norm type, since it is also used in Permissions. The
module deals with this by identifying ‘Power’ verbs (such as ‘require’, ‘grant’ etc.)
that follow the modal, based on the corpus used to develop the system. The indexes on
the instance path refer to the position of the word in the sentence. The path in the rule
engine usually specifies either a keyword or part-of-speech tag. This allows flexibility
in the level of generalisation required to avoid listing all variations while maintaining
accuracy.
The relevant SRL output is presented below in an intuitive XML notation for the
sake of readability.
<SRL>
<PREDICATE>require</PREDICATE>
<A0>It</A0>
<A1>that, when presented by the competent authority
of the home Member State, the certificate be
not more than three months old</A1>
</SRL>
The roles of the tree can then be mapped onto slots in a frame-based ontology (such
as that of Eunomos and Legal-URN).
In this example, the A0 role becomes the active role of a concept representing a
power.
<Norm>
<NormType>Power</NormType>
<ActiveRole>It</ActiveRole>
<Action>require that, when presented by the
competent authority of the home Member State,
the certificate be not more than three
months old</Action>
</Norm>
The action element could be further analysed by additional sets of rules, taking
advantage of the analysis of the SRL, to understand a condition (AM-TMP):
<SRL>
<PREDICATE>be</PREDICATE>
<AM-TMP>when presented by the competent authority
of the home Member State</AM-TMP>
<A2>not more than three months old</A2>
</SRL>
Note that there is no active role for the obligation. This slot can only be filled by
resolving the implicit anaphora. In the sentence, we have a candidate for this slot: the
A0 role in the “presented by the competent authority” subordinate sentence. However,
domain and contextual understanding is required to verify the anaphora resolution.
<Norm>
<NormType>Power</NormType>
<ActiveRole>It</ActiveRole>

123

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling

197

<Norm>
<NormType>Obligation</NormType>
<Action>the certificate be not more than three
months old</Action>
<Condition>when presented by the competent authority
of the home Member State</Condition>
</Norm>
</Norm>
Alternatively, a simpler approach, and that which taken in the system developed
for this article, is to view the sentence as containing two separate norms, a Power and
a (conditional) Obligation.
6.3 Types of meta-norms
6.3.1 Legal effect
Here is an example from Directive 98/5/EC:15
Although it is not a prerequisite for the decision of
the competent authority in the host Member State, the
temporary or permanent withdrawal by the competent authority
in the home Member State of the authorisation to practise the
profession shall automatically lead to the lawyer concerned
being temporarily or permanently prohibited from practising
under his home-country professional title in the host Member
State.

The roles of the predicate ‘lead’ in the SRL output (shown below in XML) can be
conveniently mapped to slots in the ontology.
<SRL>
<PREDICATE>lead</PREDICATE>
<A0:SBJ>
the temporary or permanent withdrawal by the competent
authority in the home Member State of the authorisation
to practise the profession
</A0:SBJ>
<A2:ADV>
to the lawyer concerned being temporarily or permanently
prohibited from practising under his home-country
professional title in the host Member State
</A2:ADV>
<AM-ADV:ADV>
Although it becomes not a prerequisite for the decision
of the competent authority in the host Member State
15 Directive 98/5/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 to facilitate
practice of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the
qualification was obtained.

123

198

L. Humphreys et al.

</AM-ADV:ADV>
</SRL>

After normalisation, the output for the ontology is as follows:
<Norm>
<NormType>Legal Effect</NormType>
<Situation>
the temporary or permanent withdrawal by the competent
authority in the home Member State of the authorisation
to practise the profession
</Situation>
<Result>
the lawyer concerned is temporarily or permanently
prohibited from practising under his home-country
professional title in the host Member State
</Result>
<Condition>
it is not a prerequisite for the decision of the
competent authority in the host Member State
</Condition>
</Norm>

Note that the condition in the above example is in truth a non-condition, it is a
statement that a possible condition does not in fact apply. The handling of alternative
condition-like clauses remains a subject for future work.
6.3.2 Scope
Statements about scope are about the subject or object of a rule. Here is an example
from Directive 98/5/EC:16
Irrespective of the rules of professional conduct to which he
is subjected in his home Member State, a lawyer practising
under his home-country professional title shall be subjected
to the same rules of professional conduct as lawyers
practising under the relevant professional title of the host
Member State in respect of all the activities he pursues in
its territory.

PathToRoot is [[u‘shall’, u‘MD’, 26], [u‘become’, u‘VB’, 27], [u‘subjected’,
u‘VBN’, 28]]. The SRL output is:
<SRL>
<A1:SBJ>
a lawyer practising under his home-country professional
title
16 Directive 98/5/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 to facilitate
practice of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the
qualification was obtained.

123

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling

199

</A1:SBJ>
<A2:ADV>
to the same rules of professional conduct as lawyers
practising under the relevant professional title of
the host Member State in respect of all the activities
he pursues in its territory
<A2:ADV>
<AM-ADV:ADV>
Irrespective of the rules of professional conduct to
which he becomes subjected in his home Member
State
<AM-ADV:ADV>
</SRL>

The output to the ontology is:
<Norm>
<NormType>Scope</NormType>
<ActiveRole>
a lawyer practising under his home-country
professional title
</ActiveRole>
<Rule>
to the same rules of professional conduct as lawyers
practising under the relevant professional title of
the host Member State in respect of all the activities
he pursues in its territory
</Rule>
<Condition>
Irrespective of the rules of professional conduct to
which he is subjected in his home Member State
</Condition>
</Norm>

Note again the non-condition in the Condition field.
6.3.3 Exception
Exceptions to norms can take place within the same sentence as a norm or outside
(in which case, it usually pertains to the sentence norm before). Exceptions can be
represented in different ways: as a separate entity with an ‘Exception’ relation to a
norm, or as as an ‘Exception’ field within the norm itself (this is the format used in
Eunomos and Legal-URN). In the XML output of this research, it is represented as a
separate entity. Here is an example of an Exception sentence from Directive 98/5/EC:17
Nevertheless, a lawyer practising under his home-country
professional title shall become exempted from that
17 Directive 98/5/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 to facilitate
practice of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the
qualification was obtained.

123

200

L. Humphreys et al.

requirement if he can prove that he is covered by
insurance taken out or a guarantee provided in
accordance with the rules of his home Member State,
insofar as such insurance or guarantee is equivalent in
terms of the conditions and extent of cover.

The arguments from the predicate ‘exempted’ are as follows:
<SRL>
<PREDICATE>exempted</PREDICATE>
<A1:SBJ>
a lawyer practising under his home-country
professional title
</A1:SBJ>
<A2:ADV>from that requirement</A2:ADV>
<AM-ADV:ADV>
if he can prove that he becomes covered by insurance
taken out or a guarantee provided in accordance with
the rules of his home Member State, insofar as such
insurance or guarantee becomes equivalent in terms of
the conditions and extent of cover
</AM-ADV:ADV>
</SRL>

These are mapped into the following slots in the XML output:
<Norm>
<NormType>Exception</NormType>
<WhatIsExcepted>
a lawyer practising under his home-country
professional title
</WhatIsExcepted>
<ExceptedFrom>from that requirement</ExceptedFrom>
<Condition>
if he can prove that he is covered by insurance taken
out or a guarantee provided in accordance with the
rules of his home Member State, insofar as such
insurance or guarantee is equivalent in terms of the
conditions and extent of cover
</Condition>
</Norm>

6.3.4 Hierarchy of norms
Finally, the corpus contains several statements expressing the relative hierarchy of
one norm with respect to another. We therefore need to have relations between norms
that express relative hierarchy. As an intermediate step, we can extract a Hierarchy
MetaNormType. This is an example from Directive 98/5/EC:18
18 Directive 98/5/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 to facilitate
practice of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the
qualification was obtained.

123

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling

201

Integration into the profession of lawyer in the host
Member State shall be subject to Article 10.

The word ‘subject’ has been transformed by the normalising module into ‘subjected’
to allow the SRL module to extract arguments from the predicate.
<SRL>
<PREDICATE>subjected<PREDICATE/>
<A1:SBJ>
Integration into the profession of
lawyer in the host Member State
</A1:SBJ>
<A2:ADV>Article 10</A2:ADV>
</SRL>

This is then transformed into the following output:
<Norm>
<NormType>Hierarchy</NormType>
<LowerPriority>
Integration into the profession of
lawyer in the host Member State
</LowerPriority>
<HigherPriority>Article 10</HigherPriority>
</Norm>

6.3.5 Rationale
Directives provide the rationale for the existence of the legislation by stating its general
purpose and referring to supporting preceding legislation.
Here is an example from Directive 98/5/EC19 of the first kind:
The purpose of this Directive is to facilitate practice of
the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a selfemployed or salaried capacity in a Member State other than
that in which the professional qualification is obtained.

Having transformed each ‘is’ and ‘are’ to ‘become’ and ‘becomes’, the pathToRoot
here is [[u‘becomes’, u‘VBZ’, 5]].
The SRL output is:
<SRL>
<PREDICATE>become</PREDICATE>
<A1:SBJ>The purpose of this Directive</A1:SBJ>
<A2:PRD>
to facilitate practice of the profession of lawyer on a
permanent basis in a self-employed or salaried capacity in
19 Directive 98/5/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 to facilitate
practice of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the
qualification was obtained.

123

202

L. Humphreys et al.

a Member State other than that in which the professional
qualification become obtained
<A2:PRD>
</SRL>

The output to the ontology is:
<Norm>
<NormType>RationalePurpose</NormType>
<Rule>this Directive</Rule>
<Purpose>
to facilitate practice of the profession of lawyer on a
permanent basis in a self-employed or salaried capacity in
a Member State other than that in which the professional
qualification is obtained
</Purpose>
</Norm>

Other trigger words and phrases that indicate conditions are: ‘so long as’, ‘in case’,
‘on condition’, ‘provided that’ and ‘insofar’, while ‘unless’ and ‘except’ usually indicate an exception.

7 Evaluation
Before evaluating the performance of the system for extracting definitions and norms,
it is worth taking into account the performance of the semantic role labeler on legislative text. The system was tested on 224 sentences from Directive 95/46/EC,20 58
definitions and 166 norms. For each sentence, the arguments for all the verb predicates
in the sentences were evaluated, and the overall sentence was evaluated as accurate if
all the arguments for all the verbs were correct. 78.5% of definitions had correct arguments for all verbs. However, only 52% of norms had the same. Generally, norms are
more complex, and therefore more errors are introduced. Nevertheless, not all errors
have consequences for the definition and norm extraction system, since only certain
predicates are used by the system.
The approach described in Sects. 5 and 6 was initially tested on Directive 98/5/EC,21
excluding the preamble and annexes. Three sentences were discarded with corrupted
output from the normalisation module.
Table 322 shows the results. Here, the strict (S) results take partially correct results as
wrong whereas the lenient (L) results take them as being correct (the latter is probably
more appropriate since the work in any case should be checked by a knowledge
engineer). These tests were conducted on legislation that was also used to develop
20 Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection
of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data.
21 Directive 98/5/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 to facilitate
practice of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the
qualification was obtained.
22 F-measure is calculated using precision and recall decimal values to 17 decimal points.

123

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling

203

Table 3 Precision, recall and F-measure of definitions and norms: preliminary experiment
Type

Number

Precision
(strict) (%)

Recall
(strict) (%)

F-measure
(strict) (%)

Precision
(lenient)
(%)

Recall
(lenient)
(%)

F-measure
(lenient)
(%)

Obligation

36

75.24

77.45

76.33

75.24

77.45

76.33

Power

13

88.64

61.90

72.90

95.35

76.92

85.15

Legal effect

10

53.33

25.81

34.78

53.33

25.81

34.78

Definition

8

100

87.10

93.10

100

87.10

93.10

Permission

6

52.94

90

66.67

52.94

90

66.67

Scope

6

73.91

77.27

75.55

94.74

90

92.31

Rationale

6

100

100

100

100

100

100

Right

2

100

100

100

100

100

100

Exception

1

100

100

100

100

100

100

Hierarchy

1

100

100

100

100

100

100

the system, which account for the exceptionally high results. What this does show is
the degree of linguistic consistency across one piece of legislation, which shows the
potential for semi-automated definition and norm extraction.
The system was then tested on unseen legislation, Directive 95/46/EC,23 excluding
the preamble and annexes. Here, almost all extracted norms were partially correct.
To understand this better, Tables 4 and 524 show the quantified results for each norm
element. Again, the strict (S) results take partially correct results as wrong whereas
the lenient (L) results take them as being correct, bearing in mind that the latter
is probably more appropriate since the work in any case should be checked by a
knowledge engineer.
The field NormType is relevant to all norms. Possible output were: Definition,
Obligation, Permission, Power, Scope, Right, Hierarchy, Exception, Legal Effect and
Unknown. All the norms classified as Unknown were in fact, actual norms of the
relevant type, apart from one Proclamation which were not sought in the program. The
evaluation also revealed a number of norms that should be classed as Liability, which
are potential obligations arising from the Power of another to impose an Obligation.
This reflects a level of uncertainty about whether such an Obligation will arise. On
the other hand, it could be argued that Obligations arising from the Obligation of
another to impose an Obligation have a greater level of certainty and should be (and
have) been classed as Obligations. Most of the errors in determining the norm type
(36%) arose from mistaking Powers for Permissions. The problem is that both types of
norms have the modal verb ‘may’. The module sought to deal with this by identifying
‘Power’ verbs that follow the modal, based on the corpus used to develop the system.
However, the evidence of this evaluation shows that this is less than satisfactory. For
EU legislation, it can be assumed that almost all norms involving the modal ‘may’ and
23 Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection
of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data.
24 F-measure is calculated using precision and recall decimal values to 17 decimal points.

123

204

L. Humphreys et al.

Table 4 Accuracy of SRL extraction of elements of definitions and norms
Element

Fully correct

Partially
correct

Wrong
(false positive)

Missing
(false negative)

Misclassified as
different element
(false negative)

Norm Type

184

N/A

66

17

N/A

Definiendum

6

8

0

2

0

Definiens

5

3

0

1

0

Includes

5

1

0

0

0

Excludes

0

0

0

3

10

Action

46

113

56

40

2

Active Role

113

6

10

33

10

Passive Role

13

15

5

90

4

Condition

30

41

35

38

13

Timeframe

11

11

9

6

0

Exception

4

13

1

7

7

Reason

2

2

6

9

0

Situation

0

0

5

1

0

Result

0

0

3

1

0

Object

1

0

0

0

0

ExcludesObject

0

3

2

3

0

HigherPriority

0

0

3

0

3

LowerPriority

0

0

0

0

0

having a Member State as an Active Role are Powers. But this is not a general solution
to the problem. Also common were the misclassifying of Obligations as Unknown,
or the extraction of too many Obligations from the sentence. Some Obligations were
missclassified as Legal Effect or Scope.
The other elements in Tables 4 and 5 are Definiendum, Definiens, Includes and
Excludes, which are all elements that pertain to Definitions. The elements Action,
Active Role, Passive Role, Condition, Timeframe, Exception and Reason pertain to
norms of the type Obligation, Permission, Power and Right. The elements Situation and
Result pertain to meta-norms of the type Legal Effect. The elements Object, Excludes
Object and Active Role pertain to meta-norms of the type Scope. The elements Higher
Priority and LowerPriority pertain to meta-norms of the type Hierarchy. There were
few meta-norms in the legislation evaluated.
The results are very varied, and shows that further work is required to achieve
acceptable results for a comprehensive norm extraction system. Nevertheless, the most
important elements—Norm Type, Active Role—are obtained with good accuracy,
which in itself should help compliance officers or related personnel in their most
important search i.e. which obligations need to be complied with.
One significant weakness, however, is the poor performance of the system on identifying Passive Roles. Moreover, apart from their identification, there are two aspects
that require further consideration. Firstly, how to distinguish between beneficiaries of

123

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling

205

Table 5 Precision, recall and F-measure of extraction of elements of definitions and norms
Element

Precision
(strict) (%)

Recall
(strict) (%)

F-measure
(strict) (%)

Precision
(lenient)
(%)

Recall
(lenient)
(%)

F-measure
(lenient)
(%)

Norm Type

73.60

91.54

81.60

73.60

91.54

81.60

Definiendum

42.86

75.00

54.55

100

87.5

93.33

Definiens

62.50

83.33

71.43

100

88.89

94.12

Includes

83.33

100

90.91

100

100

100

Excludes

0

0

0

0

0

0

Action

21.40

52.27

30.36

73.95

79.10

76.44

Active Role

87.60

72.44

79.30

92.25

73.46

81.79

Passive Role

39.39

12.15

18.57

84.85

22.95

36.13

Condition

28.30

37.04

32.09

66.98

58.20

62.28

Timeframe

35.48

64.71

45.82

70.97

78.57

74.58

Exception

22.22

22.22

22.22

94.44

54.84

69.39

Reason

20.00

18.18

19.05

40.00

30.77

34.78

Situation

0

0

0

0

0

0

Result

0

0

0

0

0

0

Object

100

100

100

100

100

100

Excludes-Object

0

0

0

60.00

50.00

54.55

Higher-Priority

0

0

0

0

0

0

Lower-Priority

0

0

0

0

0

0

norms and other passive roles, such as agents who play an active role in a condition or
exception. Secondly, how to relate the passive roles to the relevant parts of the norm.
An example of a particularly intricate norm from this point of view is the following:
Any person acting under the authority of the controller or
of the processor, including the processor himself, who has
access to personal data must not process them except on
instructions from the controller, unless he is required to
do so by law.

The high Partially Correct results for the Action element reveals that it suffers
the most from boundary errors. Boundary errors are also a problem for Conditions,
Timeframes, Exceptions and Reasons. This is one particular area where the output of
the SRL system is particularly disappointing. However, even when supplemented by
pattern-matching, problems remain. 30 Fully Correct Conditions were identified via
the SRL output as opposed to 21 via pattern-matching (keywords such as ‘where’ or
‘when’). 41 Partially Correct were identified via SRL, 34 via pattern-matching. 35
elements were wrongly classified as Conditions via SRL, 27 via pattern-matching.
38 Conditions were missed altogether and 13 Conditions were wrongly classified as
something else. The situation is similar for Timeframes and Exceptions, although there
are fewer of those in the legislation evaluated. Some improvement could be made by
deeper analysis of dependency trees. However, many of these problems arose due to

123

206

L. Humphreys et al.

problems with linking different elements of lists in the normalisation module, and this
needs to be looked at further.
The low incidence of Scope and Hierarchy in this particular legislation makes it
difficult to provide a proper evaluation of relevant elements.

8 Conclusions and future work
This section provides conclusions and contributions of the article, as well as possibilities for future work.
This article endorses the vision of Sartor (2011, page 7), of a future legal semantic
web where legal content on the web is enriched with machine processable information that can be “presented in many different ways, according to the different issues at
stake and the different roles played by its users” by focussing on extracting and linking
structured legal information for compliance purposes, building on research in legal
theory, ontologies and natural language processing. In addition to a thorough description of methodology and results, the article highlights important challenges that have
emerged from this research which will hopefully prove useful for future work in the
extraction and linking of information from legislative text.
To address the resource bottleneck problem of creating specialist knowledge management systems, in particular how to semi-automate the extraction of definitions,
norms and their elements to populate legal ontologies. Sections 5 and 6 described a
definition and norm extraction system using semantic representations from a generalpurpose SRL module (Björkelund et al. 2009), as well as dependency parse trees
from the same system. This solution was pursued in order to simplify the sets of
rules required to identify possible norms and definitions, classify their types, and map
arguments to domain-specific slots in a legal ontology.
There are a number of observations that have emerged from this evidence-based
research. While much theoretical work on norms have focused on obligations, and
there are indeed plenty of them in the legislation studied, there are also certain kinds
of norms that are less prominent in the literature but are, nevertheless, important to
cover in a comprehensive norm extraction system. EU legislation in particular are full
of norms bestowing a Power to impose certain Obligations (as well as Obligations to
impose Obligations). It is a moot point whether the secondary obligations then should
be considered Liabilities or Obligations, particularly since there is a greater element of
uncertainty where the secondary obligations derive from a Power rather than an Obligation. Legislation also contain a number of meta-norms indicating scope, hierarchy
among norms and exceptions, and these are arguably essential information to extract
for an ontology of legal norms. Statements indicating the legal effect of a particular
situation may not be norms in the strictest sense, but have important implications and
therefore should also be included. As for elements of norms, many statements refer
to the scope of the norm. In addition to the Condition element used in Eunomos and
Legal-URN, it is submitted that a Timeframe element can also be of value. One element that requires further investigation is Passive Role, since this research found that
there are many different kinds of passive roles, not only beneficiaries, and it would
be useful to distinguish between them. Another element that requires further consid-

123

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling

207

eration is the Condition element. There are a number of constructions in legislative
text regarding the applicability of norms that are somewhat similar to conditions, but
have different effects. For instance, ‘in particular’ indicates that a norm applies in a
particular scenario, but is not limited to that scenario. ‘Notwithstanding’ implies that
what might be considered as a negative condition does not in fact apply.
Other future work that follows from this research are:
– greater study on distinguishing norm types that often use the same modal verbs e.g.
Powers and Permissions, Rights and Obligations. This may involve a probabilistic
approach, and consideration of additional factors beyond predicate verbs.
– intra- and extra-sentential anaphora resolution specifically for legislative text.
There are particular challenges and opportunities here. Anaphora can take the
form of pronouns, abbreviated forms, or references to entities in other articles. A
related issue is how to determine ‘missing’ elements of a norm e.g. for normative
sentences that lack an Active Role, it is often the case that the role is implicitly
carried over from the previous sentence.
– detection of Is-A and Part-Of relationships among defined entities, and in particular, detection of Example type Definitions found in sentences containing the
construction ‘such as’.
– generation of different views of a norm based on Hohfeldian correlatives, such as
the Obligations that can be implicitly derived from Rights, since legislative text
will usually provide only one view explicitly. This can be useful for a complianceoriented system such as Legal-URN. Indeed, recent developments in research on
Legal-URN (Rabinia et al. 2020) transforms all legal statements into Obligations,
since this is the point of view most useful to the intended user.
– rigorous analysis of the relationship between norms to determine norms that may
be satisfied in alternative ways, or must be satisfied as a group, taking into account
the impact of negatives on conjunctions, as highlighted by Buabuchachart et
al Buabuchachart et al. (2013).
– the development of SRL-based information extraction modules for other jurisdictions and other languages;

References
Ajani G, Ebers M (2005) Uniform terminology for European contract law, vol 1. Nomos Verlag, BadenBaden
Ajani G, Boella G, Di Caro L, Robaldo L, Humphreys L, Praduroux S, Rossi P, Violato A (2016) The
european legal taxonomy syllabus: a multi-lingual, multi-level ontology framework to untangle the
web of european legal terminology. Appl Ontol 11(4):325–375
Bartolini R, Lenci A, Montemagni S, Pirrelli V, Soria C (2004) Automatic classification and analysis of
provisions in italian legal texts: a case study. In: OTM confederated international conferences on the
move to meaningful internet systems. Springer, pp 593–604
Berland M, Charniak E (1999) Finding parts in very large corpora. In: Proceedings of the 37th annual
meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics on Computational Linguistics. Association
for Computational Linguistics, pp 57–64
Bertoldi A, de Oliveira Chishman RL (2011) The limits of using framenet frames to build a legal ontology.
In: ONTOBRAS-MOST. Citeseer, pp 207–212

123

208

L. Humphreys et al.

Biagioli C, Francesconi E, Passerini A, Montemagni S, Soria C (2005) Automatic semantics extraction in
law documents. In: Proceedings of the 10th international conference on artificial intelligence and law.
ACM, New York, ICAIL ’05
Biemann C (2005) Ontology learning from text: a survey of methods. LDV Forum 20:75–93
Bird S (2006) Nltk: the natural language toolkit. In: Proceedings of the COLING/ACL on interactive
presentation sessions. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 69–72
Björkelund A, Hafdell L, Nugues P (2009) Multilingual semantic role labeling. In: Proceedings of the
thirteenth conference on computational natural language learning: shared task. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 43–48
Bobbitt P (2006) Constitutional interpretation. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Boella G, Humphreys L, Martin M, Rossi P, van der Torre L (2012) Eunomos, a legal document and knowledge management system to build legal services. In: AI approaches to the complexity of legal systems.
Models and ethical challenges for legal systems, legal language and legal ontologies, argumentation
and software agents. Springer, pp 131–146
Boella G, Di Caro L, Rispoli D, Robaldo L (2013a) A system for classifying multi-label text into EuroVoc.
In: Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and law, pp 239–240
Boella G, Di Caro L, Robaldo L (2013b) Semantic relation extraction from legislative text using generalized
syntactic dependencies and support vector machines. In: International workshop on rules and rule
markup languages for the semantic web. Springer, pp 218–225
Boella G, Tosatto SC, Ghanavati S, Hulstijn J, Humphreys L, Muthuri R, Rifaut A, van der Torre L (2014)
Integrating LEGAL-URN and Eunomos: towards a comprehensive compliance management solution.
In: AI approaches to the complexity of legal systems. Springer, pp 130–144
Boella G, Di Caro L, Graziadei M, Cupi L, Salaroglio CE, Humphreys L, Konstantinov H, Marko K,
Robaldo L, Ruffini C, Simov K, Stroetmann V, Violato A (2015) Linking legal open data: breaking the
accessibility and language barrier in European legislation and case law. In: Proceedings of the 15th
international conference on artificial intelligence and law. ACM, pp 171–175
Boella G, Di Caro L, Humphreys L, Robaldo L, Rossi P, van der Torre L (2016) Eunomos, a legal document
and knowledge management system for the web to provide relevant, reliable and up-to-date information
on the law. Artif Intell Law 24(3):245–283
Brill E (1992) A simple rule-based part of speech tagger. In: Proceedings of the workshop on speech and
natural language. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 112–116
Buabuchachart A, Charness N, Metcalf K, Morgenstern L (2013) Automated methods for extracting and
expanding lists in regulatory text. In: Proceedings of the first JURIX doctoral consortium and poster
sessions in conjunction with the 26th international conference on legal knowledge and information
systems, JURIX 2013, Bologna, 11–13 Dec 2013
Cai Z, Yu E (2002) Addressing performance requirements using a goal and scenario-oriented approach. In:
International conference on advanced information systems engineering. Springer, pp 706–710
Ciaramita M, Attardi G, Dell’Orletta F, Surdeanu M (2008) Desrl: a linear-time semantic role labeling system. In: Proceedings of the twelfth conference on computational natural language learning. Association
for Computational Linguistics, pp 258–262
Cortes C, Vapnik V (1995) Support-vector networks. Mach Learn 20(3):273–297
Cunningham H, Maynard D, Bontcheva K, Tablan V (2002) Gate: a framework and graphical development environment for robust NLP tools and applications. In: Proc. 40th anniversary meeting of the
association for computational linguistics (ACL)
Curran JR, Clark S, Bos J (2007) Linguistically motivated large-scale NLP with c&c and boxer. In: ACL
2007, proceedings of the 45th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, 23–30
June 2007, Prague
de Maat E, Winkels R, van Engers T (2009) Making sense of legal texts. Form Linguist Law 212:225
Fillmore CJ (1968) The case for case
Fillmore CJ (1976) Frame semantics and the nature of language. Ann N Y Acad Sci 280(1):20–32
Fillmore CJ, Ruppenhofer J, Baker CF (2004) Framenet and representing the link between semantic and
syntactic relations. Front Linguist 1:19–59
Gao X, Singh MP (2014) Extracting normative relationships from business contracts. In: International
conference on autonomous agents and multi-agent systems, AAMAS ’14, Paris, 5–9 May 2014, pp
101–108
Ghanavati S (2013) Legal-URN framework for legal compliance of business processes. Ph.D. thesis, UOttawa, Canada. http://hdl.handle.net/10393/24028

123

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling

209

Giuliano C, Lavelli A, Romano L (2006) Exploiting shallow linguistic information for relation extraction
from biomedical literature. In: EACL, Citeseer, vol 18, pp 401–408
Gliozzo AM, Giuliano C, Rinaldi R (2005) Instance pruning by filtering uninformative words: an information
extraction case study. In: Computational linguistics and intelligent text processing. Springer, pp 498–
509
Governatori G, Olivieri F, Rotolo A, Scannapieco S (2013) Computing strong and weak permissions in
defeasible logic. J Philos Logic 42(6):799–829
Grabmair M, Ashley KD, Hwa R, Sweeney PM (2011) Toward extracting information from public health
statutes using text classification machine learning. In: Legal knowledge and information systems—
JURIX 2011: the twenty-fourth annual conference, University of Vienna, Austria, 14th–16th Dec
2011, pp 73–82
Hajič J, Ciaramita M, Johansson R, Kawahara D, Martí MA, Màrquez L, Meyers A, Nivre J, Padó S,
Štěpánek J, et al (2009) The conll-2009 shared task: syntactic and semantic dependencies in multiple
languages. In: Proceedings of the thirteenth conference on computational natural language learning:
shared task. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 1–18
Harris Z (1968) Mathematical structures of language. In: Interscience tracts in pure and applied mathematics
Hearst MA (1992) Automatic acquisition of hyponyms from large text corpora. In: Proceedings of the 14th
conference on Computational linguistics—volume 2. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp
539–545
Hepp M (2007) Ontologies: state of the art, business potential, and grand challenges. In: Hepp M, Leenheer
PD, de Moor A, Sure Y (eds) Ontology management: semantic web, semantic web services, and
business applications. Springer, Berlin, pp 3–22
Hirst G (1992) Semantic interpretation and the resolution of ambiguity. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Hudson R (1984) A (1984) word grammar. Basil Blackwell, Oxford
ITU-T (2012) Recommendation Z.151 (10/12), User Requirements Notation (URN)—Language definition.
http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-Z.151/en
Johansson R, Nugues P (2008a) Dependency-based semantic role labeling of propbank. In: Proceedings of
the conference on empirical methods in natural language processing. Association for Computational
Linguistics, pp 69–78
Johansson R, Nugues P (2008b) The effect of syntactic representation on semantic role labeling. In: Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on computational linguistics-volume 1. Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp 393–400
Kaisser M, Webber B (2007) Question answering based on semantic roles. In: Proceedings of the workshop
on deep linguistic processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 41–48
Kingsbury P, Palmer M (2002) From treebank to propbank. In: LREC, Citeseer
Klein M (2001) Combining and relating ontologies: an analysis of problems and solutions. In: Workshop
on ontologies and information sharing. IJCAI’01, Seattle
Lenci A, Montemagni S, Pirrelli V, Venturi G (2009) Ontology learning from italian legal texts. In: Proceedings of the 2009 conference on law, ontologies and the semantic web: channelling the legal information
flood. IOS Press, Amsterdam, pp 75–94
Levin B (1993) English verb classes and alternations: a preliminary investigation. University of Chicago
press, Chicago
Loos EE, Anderson S, Day D, Jordan P, Wingate J (2004) Glossary of linguistic terms, vol 29. SIL International
Lyding V, Chiocchetti E, Sérasset G, Brunet-Manquat F (2006) The LexALP information system: term bank
and corpus for multilingual legal terminology consolidated
Malerba A (2017) Interpretive interactions among legal systems and argumentation schemes. PhD thesis,
alma
Marcus M, Kim G, Marcinkiewicz MA, MacIntyre R, Bies A, Ferguson M, Katz K, Schasberger B (1994)
The Penn Treebank: annotating predicate argument structure. In: Proceedings of the workshop on
human language technology. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 114–119
Màrquez L (2009) Semantic role labeling: past, present and future. In: Tutorial abstracts of ACL-IJCNLP
2009. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 3
Màrquez L, Carreras X, Litkowski KC, Stevenson S (2008) Semantic role labeling: an introduction to the
special issue. Comput Linguist 34(2):145–159

123

210

L. Humphreys et al.

Martin JH, Jurafsky D (2016) Semantic role labeling. Draft of June 26, 2015. In: Speech and language
processing
Maxwell KT, Oberlander J, Lavrenko V (2009) Evaluation of semantic events for legal case retrieval. In:
Proceedings of the WSDM, vol 9, pp 09–09
Mel’cuk IA et al (1988) Dependency syntax: theory and practice. SUNY press, Albany
Mihalcea R, Moldovan D (2000) Semantic indexing using wordnet senses. In: Proceedings of the ACL2000 workshop on recent advances in natural language processing and information retrieval: held in
conjunction with the 38th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics—volume
11. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 35–45
Miller GA, Beckwith R, Fellbaum C, Gross D, Miller KJ (1990) Introduction to wordnet: an on-line lexical
database. Int J Lexicogr 3(4):235–244
Moldovan DI, Rus V (2001) Logic form transformation of wordnet and its applicability to question
answering. In: Proceedings of the 39th annual meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics.
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 402–409
Palmirani M, Ceci M, Radicioni D, Mazzei A (2011) Framenet model of the suspension of norms. In:
Proceedings of the 13th international conference on artificial intelligence and law. ACM, pp 189–193
Palmirani M, Martoni M, Rossi A, Bartolini C, Robaldo L (2018) Legal ontology for modelling GDPR
concepts and norms. In: JURIX, pp 91–100
Payne TE (1997) Describing morphosyntax: a guide for field linguists. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Rabinia A, Ghanavati S, Humphreys L, Hahmann T (2020) A methodology for the formal legal GRL framework: a research preview. In: Proceedings of the working conference on requirements engineering:
foundation for software quality, to appear
Robaldo L, Sun X (2017) Reified input/output logic: combining input/output logic and reification to represent
norms coming from existing legislation. J Logic Comput 27(8):2471–2503
Robaldo L, Caselli T, Grella M (2011) Rule-based creation of TimeML documents from dependency trees.
In: Congress of the Italian association for artificial intelligence. Springer, pp 389–394
Robaldo L, Bartolini C, Palmirani M, Rossi A, Martoni M, Lenzini G (2019) Formalizing GDPR provisions
in reified I/O logic: the DAPRECO knowledge base. J Logic Lang Inf 1–49
Rossi P, Vogel C (2004) Terms and concepts; towards a syllabus for european private law. Eur Rev Private
Law (ERPL) 12(2):293–300
Rus V (2002) Logic form for wordnet glosses and applications. PhD thesis, Phd thesis, Southern Methodist
University
Sartor G (2011) Access to legislation in the semantic web. In: Biasiotti M, Faro S (eds) From information
to knowledge—online access to legal information: methodologies. Trends and perspectives. IOS
Sérasset G (1995) Interlingual lexical organisation for multilingual lexical databases in nadia.
Siena A (2010) Engineering law-compliant requirements: the nòmos framework. PhD thesis, University of
Trento
Stevenson M, Greenwood MA (2005) A semantic approach to IE pattern induction. In: Proceedings of the
43rd annual meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational
Linguistics, pp 379–386
Surdeanu M, Harabagiu S, Williams J, Aarseth P (2003) Using predicate-argument structures for information
extraction. In: Proceedings of the 41st annual meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics—
volume 1. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 8–15
Surdeanu M, Johansson R, Meyers A, Màrquez L, Nivre J (2008) The CoNLL-2008 shared task on joint
parsing of syntactic and semantic dependencies. In: Proceedings of the twelfth conference on computational natural language learning. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 159–177
Szpektor I, Tanev H, Dagan I, Coppola B et al (2004) Scaling web-based acquisition of entailment relations.
EMNLP 4:41–48
Venturi G, Lenci A, Montemagni S, Vecchi EM, Sagri MT, Tiscornia D, Agnoloni T (2009) Towards a
framenet resource for the legal domain. LOAIT pp 67–76
Viet LD, Sinh VT, Minh NL, Satoh K (2017) Convamr: abstract meaning representation parsing for legal
document. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.06141
Walter S (2009) Definition extraction from court decisions using computational linguistic technology. Form
Linguist Law 212:183
Walton D, Sartor G, Macagno F (2016) An argumentation framework for contested cases of statutory
interpretation. Artif Intell Law 24(1):51–91

123

Populating legal ontologies using semantic role labeling

211

Wenar L (2011) Rights. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/rights/. Accessed 15 July 2011
Wyner A (2012) Problems and prospects in the automatic semantic analysis of legal texts. In: SPLET
workshop at LREC
Wyner A, Peters W (2011) On rule extraction from regulations. In: JURIX, Citeseer, vol 11, pp 113–122
Wyner A, Peters W (2012) Semantic annotations for legal text processing using gate teamware. In: Semantic
processing of legal texts (SPLeT-2012), p 34
Yangarber R, Grishman R, Tapanainen P, Huttunen S (2000) Automatic acquisition of domain knowledge for
information extraction. In: Proceedings of the 18th conference on computational linguistics—volume
2. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 940–946
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional affiliations.

Aﬃliations
Llio Humphreys1 · Guido Boella1 · Leendert van der Torre2 ·
Livio Robaldo2 · Luigi Di Caro1 · Sepideh Ghanavati3 · Robert Muthuri4
Guido Boella
boella@di.unito.it
Leendert van der Torre
leon.vandertorre@uni.lu
Livio Robaldo
livio.robaldo@uni.lu
Luigi Di Caro
dicaro@di.unito.it
Sepideh Ghanavati
sepideh.ghanavati@maine.edu
Robert Muthuri
rmuthuri@strathmore.edu
1

University of Torino, Via Pessinetto 12, Turin, Italy

2

University of Luxembourg, Maison du Nombre, 6 Avenue de la Fonte, Esch-sur-Alzette,
Luxembourg

3

University of Maine, 5711 Boadman Hall, Room 234, Orono, ME, USA

4

Strathmore University Centre for Intellectual Property and Information Technology Law,
Madaraka Estate, Ole Sangale Road, Nairobi, Kenya

123

