Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science (2021) 49:30–50
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-020-00749-9

CONCEPTUAL/THEORETICAL PAPER

A strategic framework for artificial intelligence in marketing
Ming-Hui Huang 1 & Roland T. Rust 2
Received: 3 March 2020 / Accepted: 29 September 2020 / Published online: 4 November 2020
# The Author(s) 2020

Abstract
The authors develop a three-stage framework for strategic marketing planning, incorporating multiple artificial intelligence (AI)
benefits: mechanical AI for automating repetitive marketing functions and activities, thinking AI for processing data to arrive at
decisions, and feeling AI for analyzing interactions and human emotions. This framework lays out the ways that AI can be used
for marketing research, strategy (segmentation, targeting, and positioning, STP), and actions. At the marketing research stage,
mechanical AI can be used for data collection, thinking AI for market analysis, and feeling AI for customer understanding. At the
marketing strategy (STP) stage, mechanical AI can be used for segmentation (segment recognition), thinking AI for targeting
(segment recommendation), and feeling AI for positioning (segment resonance). At the marketing action stage, mechanical AI
can be used for standardization, thinking AI for personalization, and feeling AI for relationalization. We apply this framework to
various areas of marketing, organized by marketing 4Ps/4Cs, to illustrate the strategic use of AI.
Keywords Artificial intelligence . Machine learning . Mechanical AI . Thinking AI . Feeling AI . Strategic AI marketing .
Marketing strategy . Standardization . Personalization . Relationalization . Segmentation . Targeting . Positioning . 4Ps . 4Cs

Artificial intelligence (AI) in marketing is currently gaining
importance, due to increasing computing power, lower computing costs, the availability of big data, and the advance of
machine learning algorithms and models. We see wide applications of AI in various areas of marketing. For example,
Amazon.com’s Prime Air uses drones to automate shipping
and delivery. Domino’s pizza is experimenting with
autonomous cars and delivery robots to deliver pizza to the
customer’s door. RedBalloon uses Albert’s AI marketing
platform to discover and reach new customers. Macy’s On
Call uses natural language processing to provide an in-store
John Hulland and Mark Houston served as Editors for this article.
* Ming-Hui Huang
huangmh@ntu.edu.tw
Roland T. Rust
rrust@rhsmith.umd.edu
1

Department of Information Management, College of Management,
National Taiwan University, 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Rd, Taipei 10617,
Taiwan

2

Center for Excellence in Service at the Robert H. Smith School of
Business, University of Maryland, 3451 Van Munching Hall,
College Park, MD 20742, USA

personal assistant to customers. Lexus uses IBM Watson to
write its TV commercial scripts, “Driven by Intuition.”
Affectiva, based on affective analytics, recognizes consumers’
emotions while they are watching commercials. Replika, a
machine learning-based chatbot, provides emotional comfort
to consumers by mimicking their styles of communication. It
has even been asserted that AI will change the future of marketing substantially (Davenport et al. 2020; Rust 2020).
However, academic marketing research to date provides insufficient guidance about how best to leverage the benefits of
AI for marketing impact.
The academic literature on AI in marketing may be sorted
into four main types. These are (1) technical AI algorithms for
solving specific marketing problems (e.g., Chung et al. 2009;
Chung et al. 2016; Dzyabura and Hauser 2011, 2019), (2)
customers’ psychological reactions to AI (e.g., Luo et al.
2019; Mende et al. 2019), (3) effects of AI on jobs and society
(e.g., Autor and Dorn 2013; Frey and Osborne 2017; Huang
and Rust 2018), and (4) managerial and strategic issues related
to AI (e.g., Fountaine et al. 2019; Huang and Rust 2020).
The fourth literature stream, managerial issues related to
AI, is currently dominated by consultants gravitating to the
latest hot topic, and largely lacks a solid academic basis, albeit
there are some recent studies trying to tackle strategic marketing issues. Examples include unstructured data for various

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2021) 49:30–50

areas of marketing (Balducci and Marinova 2018), analytics
for consumer value in healthcare (Agarwal et al. 2020), machine learning prediction for mobile marketing personalization (Tong et al. 2020), in-store technology (e.g., robots, smart
displays, or augmented reality) for convenience or social presence (Grewal et al. 2020), and AI for personalized customer
engagement (Kumar et al. 2019).
To facilitate the strategic use of AI in marketing, we develop a three-stage framework, from marketing research, to marketing strategy (segmentation, targeting, and positioning,
STP), to marketing actions (4Ps/4Cs), for strategic marketing
planning incorporating AI. This strategic AI framework is
based on a more nuanced perspective of the technical development of AI, existing studies on AI and marketing, and current and future AI applications. It can be used for strategic
marketing planning, for organizing the existing AI marketing
studies, and for identifying research gaps in AI marketing.
This paper contributes to the strategic application of AI in
marketing by developing a framework that guides the strategic
planning of AI in marketing in a systematic and actionable
manner. It is achieved by bringing together diverse AI literatures on algorithms (e.g., Bauer and Jannach 2018; Davis and
Marcus 2015), psychology (e.g., Lee et al. 2018; Leung et al.
2018), societal effects (e.g., Autor and Dorn 2013; Frey and
Osborne 2017), and managerial implications (e.g., Huang
et al. 2019) to explore what those literatures can tell us about
managing AI in marketing. Marketing is an applied field, and
using the more foundational literatures to inform marketing
practice is an important role for marketing academia. This
paper also contributes to strategic marketing research by providing a systematic and rigorous approach to identifying research gaps that bridge strategic AI marketing practice and
research.

Conceptual foundation
The marketing research–strategy–action cycle
We propose a three-stage strategic planning framework based
on the marketing research–marketing strategy–marketing action cycle. Similar cycles have been proposed, such as
Deming’s (1986) plan-do-check-act cycle, but that cycle omits
the role of strategy. Our cycle views strategic planning as a
circular process, starting from conducting marketing research
to understand the market, the firm, the competitors, and the
customers; to developing strategies for segmentation,
targeting, and positioning; and to designing specific marketing
actions to execute the strategy. This cycle does not stop at
marketing actions. The execution of marketing actions will
feed back to marketing research as market data, which constitutes a continuous cycle for marketing research–strategy–action, as illustrated in Fig. 1.

31

Multiple AI intelligences
Figure 1 illustrates that AI can play critical roles in all three
strategic marketing stages. It shows that there are multiple AI
intelligences that a marketer can leverage: mechanical, thinking, and feeling.
We conceptualize AI as the use of computational machinery to emulate capabilities inherent in humans, such as doing
physical or mechanical tasks, thinking, and feeling; the multiple AI intelligence view considers that, rather than treating
AI as a thinking machine, AI can be designed to have multiple
intelligences, as humans have, for different tasks. Ordered by
the difficulty with which AI can address them, there are mechanical, thinking, and feeling AI intelligences (Huang and
Rust 2018; Huang et al. 2019).
Mechanical AI is designed for automating repetitive and
routine tasks. For example, remote sensing, machine translation, classification algorithms, clustering algorithms, and dimensionality reduction are some current technologies that can
be considered mechanical AI.
Thinking AI is designed for processing data to arrive at
new conclusions or decisions. The data are typically unstructured. Thinking AI is good at recognizing patterns and regularities in data, for example, text mining, speech recognition,
and facial recognition. Machine learning, neural networks,
and deep learning (neural networks with additional layers)
are some of the current methods by which thinking AI processes data. IBM Watson, expert systems, and recommender
systems are some current applications for decision making.
Feeling AI is designed for two-way interactions involving
humans, and/or for analyzing human feelings and emotions.
Some current technologies include sentiment analysis, natural
language processing (NLP), text-to-speech technology, recurrent neural networks (RNN), chatbots for mimicking human
speech, embodied and embedded virtual agents for human
interactions, and robots with customized hardware for sensing
affective signals (McDuff and Czerwinski 2018).
It is important to note two qualifications of this multiple AI
intelligences view. First, although we set up three intelligences, the assignment of some applications to a particular
intelligence is mainly based on the purpose they are used
for. Sometimes those applications may have some elements
of more than one intelligence; thus, suggesting that the three
intelligences are fuzzy sets (Varki et al. 2000). For example,
facial recognition that is trying to identify someone is thinking
AI (e.g., customs uses it to identify potential terrorists), while
facial recognition that is trying to figure out somebody’s emotional state from their facial expression is feeling AI (e.g.,
advertisers use it to identify audience responses to ads).
Second, we do not have true feeling AI yet1; thus, the current
1

According to Huang and Rust (2018), true feeling AI needs to be able to
recognize, emulate, and respond appropriately to human emotions.

32

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2021) 49:30–50

Marketing Action

Marketing Research

• Standardization (mechanical AI)
• Personalization (thinking AI)
• Relationalization (feeling AI)

• Data collection (mechanical AI)
• Market analysis (thinking AI)
• Customer understanding (feeling AI)

Marketing Strategy
• Segmentation (mechanical AI)
• Targeting (thinking AI)
• Positioning (feeling AI)

Fig. 1 AI and strategic marketing decisions

practice is to use thinking AI to analyze emotional data (e.g.,
affective analytics) and two-way interactions (e.g., chatbots
and social bots). Emotional data are distinct from cognitive
data, in that they are contextual, individual-specific, and typically multimodal (speech, gestures, and language). Such data
are about the individual in context, meaning that feeling AI
needs to incorporate contextual and individual-specific data
into modeling the emotional state of an individual.

Multiple benefits of AI
Each of the AI intelligences can deliver its unique benefit:
mechanical AI is best for standardization, thinking AI is good
for personalization, and feeling AI is ideal for relationalization
(Huang and Rust 2020).
Mechanical AI provides standardization benefits due to its
ability to be consistent. In marketing, various forms of mechanical AI have been used to provide a standardization benefit; for example, collaborative robots (cobots) help with packaging (Colgate et al. 1996), drones distribute physical goods,
self-service robots deliver service, and service robots automate social presence in frontline (Mende et al. 2019; van
Doorn et al. 2017). All these applications aim to generate
standardized, consistent, and reliable outcomes.

Thinking AI provides personalization benefits, due to its
ability to recognize patterns from data (e.g., text mining,
speech recognition, facial recognition). Any marketing functions and activities that can benefit from personalized outcomes should consider thinking AI. The most common applications in marketing are various personalized recommendation systems (Chung et al. 2009; Chung et al. 2016), such as
Netflix movie recommendations and Amazon cross-selling
recommendations.
Feeling AI provides relationalization benefits (i.e., personalizes relationships), due to its capability to recognize and
respond to emotions. Any marketing functions or activities
that require interaction and communication, with the goal of
relational benefits (e.g., when customer lifetime value is high)
should consider feeling AI—one example being customer service. A broad range of marketing functions involves feelings,
for example, customer satisfaction, customer complaints, customer moods, and emotions in advertising, etc., and can make
use of feeling AI.

The strategic AI framework
We propose a three-stage strategic framework for using AI in
marketing that leverages the three AI intelligences and their

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2021) 49:30–50

benefits, as shown in Fig. 1. At the marketing research stage,
AI is used for market intelligence, including mechanical AI
for data collection, thinking AI for market analysis, and feeling AI for customer understanding.
At the marketing strategy stage, AI is used for the strategic
decisions of segmentation, targeting, and positioning.
Specifically, mechanical AI is ideal for discovering novel customer preference patterns in unstructured data, thinking AI is
ideal for recommending the best segment(s) to target, and
feeling AI is ideal for communicating with the targeted customers about the product.2
At the marketing action stage, AI is used for the benefits of
standardization, personalization, and relationalization, individually or synergistically. Marketers need to decide which
AI intelligence(s) to use for which marketing actions. For
example, payment and delivery are functions that can benefit
from standardization by using mechanical AI, such as automatic payment and delivery tracking. Digital marketing can
benefit from personalization by using thinking AI, such as
various recommendation systems. Customer service and
f r o n t l i n e c u s t o m e r i n t e r a ct i o n c a n b e n e f i t fr o m
relationalization by using feeling AI, such as social robots
greeting customers and conversational AI providing customer
service. The discussion of the strategic use of AI in marketing
action is organized in terms of the marketing 4Ps/4Cs, to balance both the marketer and customer sides. Table 1 defines
various strategic elements of this strategic AI framework,
Table 2 illustrates marketing actions by using mechanical AI
for standardization, thinking AI for personalization, and feeling AI for relationalization, with various examples and current
and future scenarios,3 and Table 3 summarizes the existing
literature for using AI in each of the strategic elements. We
discuss this three-stage framework in the following sections.

Marketing research
At this strategic stage, mechanical AI can be used for data
collection, thinking AI for market analysis, and feeling AI
for customer understanding.
Mechanical AI for data collection Mechanical AI can automate
data collection about the market, the environment, the firm,
the competitors, and the customers. In the digitally connected
world, market data can be easily tracked and monitored. Data
sensing, tracking, and collection are routine, repetitive tasks
that can be easily automated by mechanical AI.
Existing studies have shown various ways of using mechanical AI for data collection. For example, customer
2
The term “product” is used to refer to both tangible goods and intangible
services.
3
The two strategic stages, marketing research and marketing strategy, are less
relevant for this marketing practice illustration.

33

intelligence, including data about consumers, their activities,
and their environments, can be collected if they use connected
devices (Cooke and Zubcsek 2017), product usage and consumption experience can be visualized with Internet of Things
(IoT) (Ng and Wakenshaw 2017), various advanced technologies and analytics can capture unstructured marketing activity data (Balducci and Marinova 2018), in-car sensors can
track driving behavior for determining insurance premiums
(Soleymanian et al. 2019), and retail technologies, such as
heat maps, video surveillance, and beacons, can be used for
profiling and recognizing retail shoppers (Kirkpatrick 2020).
These studies show that, given the repetitive, routine, but
high-volume nature of market data, mechanical AI can collect
data efficiently at scale.
The data collection capability of mechanical AI is not limited to observable behavioral data; it can also be used to facilitate survey or experimental data collection to capture consumer psychographics, opinions, and attitudes. For example,
human administration and supervision of ongoing surveys are
no longer required and can be automated. SurveyMonkey and
SurveyCake are two commercial survey platforms that automate survey design and data collection.
Thinking AI for market analysis Thinking AI can be used to
identify competitors in a well-defined market or outside options in a new market, and to derive insights for a product’s
competitive advantages (i.e., the way the product can do better
than competitors to meet customer demands). For example,
supervised machine learning can be used for a mature market
where the market structure is stable and known to marketers,
whereas unsupervised machine learning can be used for a new
market or spotting outside options where the market structure
and trends are unstable and unknown to marketers.
In marketing practice, predictive analytics are commonly
used to predict volatile market trends and customers’ heterogeneous preferences. For example, Gap, the fashion clothing
brand, uses it to predict fast fashion trends to better meet
customer needs, and Amazon uses it to predict a customer’s
future orders (i.e., anticipatory fulfilling).
Existing studies have demonstrated various potential uses
of thinking AI for market analysis. Automated text analysis
can be applied for consumer research (Humphreys and Wang
2018), for marketing insights (i.e., prediction and understanding) (Berger et al. 2019), and for analyzing consumer consideration heuristics (Dzyabura and Hauser 2011). Machine
learning algorithms and lexicon-based text classification can
be used to analyze various social media datasets (Hartmann
et al. 2019). Also, big data marketing analytics is now a mainstream approach for generating marketing insights (Berger
et al. 2019; Chintagunta et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2016; Wedel
and Kannan 2016).
Specific applications include mapping market structures
for large retail assortments using a neural network language

34
Table 1

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2021) 49:30–50
A strategic framework for AI in marketing

AI intelligence
Strategic decision

Mechanical AI

Marketing research

Data collection
Automate continuous market
and customer data sensing,
tracking, collecting,
and processing
Marketing strategy (STP) Segmentation
Use mechanical AI to identify novel
customer preference patterns
Marketing action (4Ps/4Cs) Standardization

Thinking AI

Feeling AI

Market analysis
Use marketing analytics to identify
competitors and competitive
advantages

Customer understanding
Use emotional data and customer
analytics to understand existing and
potential customer needs and wants

Targeting
Use thinking AI to recommend
the best target segments
Personalization

Positioning
Use feeling AI to develop positioning
that resonates with customers
Relationalization

Product/Consumer

Automate the process and output of Personalize products based on
meeting customer needs and wants
customer preferences
Price/Cost
Automate the process of price setting Personalize prices based on
and payment
customer willingness to pay
Place/Convenience
Automate customer
Personalize frontline interactions
access to product
Promotion/Communication Automate communication with
Customize promotional content for
customers
personal communication

Understand and meet customer
emotional needs and wants
Negotiate price and justify the cost
interactively
Personalize experience for
customer engagement
Tailor communication based on
customer emotional preferences and
reactions

Note. Product includes tangible goods and intangible services

model, by analyzing the co-occurrences of products in shopping baskets (Gabel et al. 2019), detecting copycat mobile
apps using a machine learning copycat-detection method
(Wang et al. 2018), and aiding social media content engineering by employing natural language processing algorithms that
discover the associations between social media marketing
content and user engagement (Lee et al. 2018).
Feeling AI for customer understanding Feeling AI can be used
to understand existing and potential customer needs and
wants, for example, who they are, what they want, and what
their current solutions are. The major distinction between market analysis and customer understanding is that the latter often
involves emotional data about customer sentiments, feelings,
preferences, and attitudes. Thus, feeling AI can do a better job
of understanding customers than mechanical AI and thinking
AI, due to its capability of analyzing emotional data.
For existing customers, marketers can use feeling AI to
answer the questions of whether they are happy with the product and why. Existing customers’ preferences are more stable,
and a company has past and current transaction data for a
deeper understanding. For example, Affectiva partnered with
Ford to create AutoEmotive sentiment analysis, to try to figure
out drivers’ emotional states.
For potential customers, marketers can use feeling AI to
understand what they want and why they are happy with competitors or outside options. Potential customers’ needs and
wants are more difficult to predict, and their emotional data
are less available. In marketing practice, Albert AI,
Adgorithm’s AI-driven marketing platform, has been used
by RedBalloon to discover and reach new customers (Sutton

2018) and by Harley-Davidson to identify high potential customers based on the company’s customer relationship management database, personalizing the marketing campaign accordingly (Power 2017).
In academic research, existing studies have shown various
approaches of using feeling AI to understand customers. For
example, the sentiment expressed by consumers in social media (e.g., online reviews, tweets), including explicit and implicit language and discourse patterns, can be analyzed to
understand consumer responses using their own language
(Hewett et al. 2016; Humphreys and Wang 2018; Ordenes
et al. 2017), the interaction between conversational AI and
customers can be enhanced by applying analytical mapping
to script appropriate response sequences that make customers
feel that they have a “conversation” with AI (Avery and
Steenburgh 2018), consumer consideration heuristics can be
understood by machine learning (Dzyabura and Hauser 2011),
and customer needs can be identified from user-generated
content using convolutional neural network machine learning
(Timoshenko and Hauser 2019).

Marketing strategy (STP)
At this strategic stage, marketers can use AI for the three key
strategic decisions: segmentation, targeting, and positioning.
However, before proceeding to specific STP decisions,
marketers need to decide the overall strategic positioning to
guide their STP decisions. Huang and Rust (2017) propose a
technology-driven approach to positioning a firm’s strategy
along the dimensions of standardization–personalization and
transaction–relationship. A firm can pursue a commodity

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2021) 49:30–50
Table 2

35

Illustrative examples and scenarios of using the three AI intelligences in various areas of marketing organized by 4Ps/4Cs

4Ps/4Cs

Area of marketing

Mechanical AI for standardization

Thinking AI for personalization

Product/
Consumer

Product/branding

• Track and monitor product adoption • Gap uses predictive analytics
and acceptance
for fashion trends
• Tailor Brands automate logo design • Computing creativity for
service innovation
• Brand tracking through text
analysis
• AI diet personalizes diet
algorithm for each consumer

Feeling AI for relationalization
• Train bots to have brand
personality
• Sky uses ML to recommend
programs according to the
viewer’s mood
• Real-time conversations with
consumers
• Replika, a ML chatbot, provides
emotional comfort to consumers
by mimicking their styles
of communication
• NLP chatbots analyze and
respond to customer emotions
• Cogito’s emotional AI analyzes
conversation and provides
guidance to customer agents
• Price negotiation

• Text-based chatbots handle massive • NLP chatbots analyze
amount of routine cases simultaheterogeneous customer
neously
voices (e.g., customers with
accents or issues are
contextual-dependent)
Price/Cost
Pricing
• Automatic payment
• Personalized pricing
• Apple Pay, Google Pay, PayPal,
• ML for price optimization by
Amazon Payments, and Square
product, channel, and customer
Place/
Retailing/frontline • Self-check-in and check-out
• Macy’s On Call (NLP personal • Customer greeting robots (e.g.,
Pepper)
Convenience
• Giant grocery’s Marty robot
shopping app)
interact with customers in the
identifies hazards
• Alibaba’s FashionAI smart
frontline
• HaiDiLao’s robots deliver hotpot
mirrors display complementary
soup from kitchen to table side
items
• Robotic kiosks answer routine
questions
Distribution/
• Cobots automate packaging
• Amazon uses predictive analytics • Amazon Go convenience store
logistics/
• Amazon Prime Air and UPS’s drone
for anticipatory shipping
uses facial recognition to
delivery
delivery
• Domino’s pizza uses self-driving
identify customers
• IoT automates consumption tracking
cars for delivery
and order refilling
• Self-service
Promotion/
Advertising/digital • Automate targeting and retargeting • AI writer creates and personalizes • Affectiva tracks audience feeling
Communication
marketing
• Automate media scheduling and
content
and personalizes ad messages
buying
• Lexus car uses IBM Watson to • Wylei uses predictive AI to create
• Automate consumer webpage
create commercial script
and deliver personalized content
browsing using hotlink assignment • Kantar’s ad analytics help
for engaging customers
• Automate real-time posting,
advertisers create content
• Kia used ML to identify social
bidding, and updating
• Albert AI personalizes campaign
media influencers for its 2016
• Automate push content, ad, and
for Harley-Davidson
Super Bowl campaign
notification to consumers’ devices • Personalized campaign content • Emotion sensing from post
based on analytical customer
message or conversational
profiling
content
• Personalize search using social
influence
• Tracking and measuring
campaigns
Customer service

Note. The two higher strategic levels, marketing research and marketing strategy, are not included, due to them being less observable from marketing
practice

strategy that uses automated/robotic technology for efficiency,
a relational strategy that cultivates the existing customers’
lifetime value, a static personalization strategy that uses
cross-sectional big data analytics (e.g., like-minded customers) for personalization, or an adaptive personalization
strategy that uses longitudinal customer data for dynamic personalization over time. This strategic positioning will guide
firms’ STP decisions. For example, if a firm pursues the static

personalization strategy, the firm may want to have a big,
relevant, existing and potential customer database and let unsupervised machine learning explore patterns of preference or
purchase behavior as the basis of targeting and positioning. If
a firm pursues the adaptive personalization strategy, the firm
may want to use supervised machine learning to continue
analyzing existing customers’ satisfactions/dissatisfactions
over time (which may not be big). However, if firms embrace

36
Table 3

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2021) 49:30–50
Prior and current AI research organized by the strategic framework

AI intelligence
Strategic decision

Mechanical AI

Marketing
research

Data collection
Market analysis
Customer understanding
• IoT visualizes usage and
• IoT reconfigures product and service • Deep learning and NLP analyze
experience data (Ng and
that shifts boundaries of Things (Ng
customer perceptions (Ramaswamy
Wakenshaw 2017)
and Wakenshaw 2017)
and DeClerck 2018)
• Connected devices collect
• NLP and ML map market structures • Sentiment analysis for social media
customer intelligence (Cooke and
for large retail assortments (Gabel
content understands consumer
Zubcsek 2017)
et al. 2019)
responses using their own language
• Various online platforms make
• Lexicon-based and ML algorithms
(Hewett et al. 2016 ; Humphreys and
unstructured big data available for
text mining social media data for
Wang 2018 ; Ordenes et al. 2017).
cloud computing to predict sales
marketing research (Hartmann et al. • ML for understanding consumer
and consumption (Liu et al. 2016)
2019)
consideration heuristics (Dzyabura
• Unstructured data for marketing
• Big data marketing analytics for
and Hauser 2011)
insights (Balducci and Marinova
marketing insights (Berger et al.
• Convolutional neural network
2018)
2019 ; Chintagunta et al. 2016; Liu
identifies customer needs from
• Sensors tracking driving behavior
et al. 2016; Wedel and Kannan 2016)
user-generated content (Timoshenko
provide insurers individual-level • Analytical and intuitive AI for service
and Hauser 2019)
• Consumer and smart object in IoT as
driving data (Soleymanian et al.
analytics (Huang and Rust 2018)
relationship journey (Novak and
2019)
• AI for solving marketing problems
Hoffman 2019)
• Retail tracking technologies, such
(Overgoor et al. 2019)
• Consumer resistance to personal
as heat maps, video surveillance,
medical AI (Longoni et al. 2019)
and Beacons collect in-store
• Consumers may not prefer
shopper data (Kirkpatrick 2020)
identity-related automated products
(Leung et al. 2018)
• Anthropomorphized consumer robots
increase perceived warmth but
decrease liking (Kim et al. 2019)

Marketing
strategy
(STP)

Segmentation
Targeting
Positioning
• Text-mining and ML automatically • ML and causal forests for targeting
• Data mining for distilling a
categorize loan borrowers (Netzer
cancer outreach marketing (Chen
customer-based perceptual map
et al. 2019)
et al. 2020)
(Daabes and Kharbat 2017)
• Conjoint analysis with sparse
• ML for optimizing the targeting of
• Tourism positioning slogans in top
learning for consumer preferences
promotions for new customers
destinations emphasize affective
in multiple segments (Chen,
(Simester et al. 2020)
component (Gali, Camprubi, and
Iyengar, and Iyengar 2017)
• ML techniques for field experiments
Donaire (2017)
• Automated text analysis and
data to identify the best targets for
correspondence analysis for
proactive churn programs (Ascarza
psychographic consumer
2018)
segmentation in the art market
• Digital consumer profiling for
(Pitt et al. 2020)
targeting (Neumann et al. 2019)
• Data mining for tourist segments • Combining statistical and data-mining
based on the meaning of
techniques to target customers (Drew
destinations to consumers (Valls
et al. 2001)
et al. 2018)
• Variational Bayes ML segments
• Retail big data for micro segment
customers based on retailer-brand
customers (Dekimpe 2020)
and channel (Danaher et al. 2020)
Standardization
Personalization
Relationalization
• Consumers may not prefer
• Topic modeling and ML for service • Train conversational AI to have brand
automated products that are
innovation and design (Antons and
personality (Wilson and Daugherty
related to their identity (Leung
Breidbach 2018)
2018)
et al. 2018)
• Adaptive personalization systems
• AI personalizes engagement marketing
(Chung et al. 2009; Chung et al.
(Kumar et al. 2019)
2016; Dzyabura and Hauser 2019;
• Service interactions can be
Liebman et al. 2019)
personalized by “substituting
• Deep learning for personalized
information for interaction” (Glushko
point-of-interest recommendation
and Nomorosa 2013)
(Guo et al. 2018)
• AI intelligences can be used to engage
• Video-based automated recommender
customers in the service journey
systems (Lu, Xiao, and Ding 2016)
(Huang and Rust 2020)

Marketing Product/
action Consumer
(4Ps/4Cs)

Thinking AI

Feeling AI

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2021) 49:30–50

37

Table 3 (continued)
AI intelligence
Strategic decision

Mechanical AI

Thinking AI

Feeling AI
• Track brand reputation through
sentiment analyses social media
content (Rust et al. 2020)
• Customers perceive AI chatbots to be
to be less empathetic (Luo et al. 2019)

Price/
Cost

• Consumers’ online WOM can be
used to automate price changes
based on ML tools (Feng et al.
2019)

• Mechanical AI automates service
process (Huang and Rust 2018)
• IoT optimizes retail processes
(Grewal et al. 2018)
• Service robots interact with scale
and consistency (Wirtz et al.
2018)
• Service robots automate social
presence in frontline (Mende
et al. 2019; van Doorn et al.
2017)
Promotion/
• Automate classification of social
Communication
media content and sentiment
(Hartmann et al. 2019)
• AI automates media buying
process (Chen et al. 2019)
Place/
Convenience

• Multiarmed bandit algorithms from
statistical machine learning
dynamically adjusted online prices
with incomplete price information
(Misra et al. 2019)
• Machine learning based on Bayesian
inference optimize online pricing
with sparse and noisy data (Bauer
and Jannach 2018)
• Consumers’ private information for
price personalization (Montes et al.
2019)
• Video-based garment recommender
(Lu et al. 2016)
• Service robots deliver customized
experience (Wirtz et al. 2018)

• Interpersonal likeability would impact
the price negotiation outcome in a
B2B relationship (Pulles and
Hartman 2017)

• Intelligent purchasing, dynamic
pricing, targeting, and retargeting
(Kietzmann et al. 2018)
• Content engineering by ML and NLP
(Lee et al. 2018)
• Combine ML and NLP to detect
copycat apps (Wang et al. 2018)
• AI transforms advertising creative
processes (i.e., programmatic
creative) (Chen et al. 2019)
• Personalized mobile marketing
strategies center on 4Ps (Tong et al.
2020)

• NLP analyzes social media ad content
enhances consumer engagement (Lee
et al. 2018)
• AI chatbots for outbound sales calls
(Luo et al. 2019)
• NLP algorithms analyze Facebook
messages to examine the association
between social media content and
user engagement (Lee et al. 2018)
• Personalized ad backfires if privacy
concern is heightened (Kim, Barasz,
and John 2019)

a data-driven approach to STP, it can rely more heavily on AI
to explore the STP possibilities.
In general, this stage of strategic decisions relies more on
thinking AI, for its capability of processing data to arrive at
new conclusions or decisions. However, it is worth reiterating
that the assignment of some applications to a particular intelligence is mainly based on the purpose an application is used
for. For example, when thinking AI becomes completely routinized, as is often the case in segmentation applications, it
shares many of the characteristics of mechanical AI, because
it simply identifies patterns from data routinely and repetitively, without involving much about the purpose of making new
decisions (e.g., segmentation but not retargeting).

• Service robots surface acting (Wirtz
et al. 2018)
• Consumers resistance to medical AI
(Longoni et al. 2019)
• One-voice strategy for customer engagement across diverse interfaces
enabled by machine-age technologies
in a customer journey (Singh et al.
2020)

Segmentation
Segmentation is to slice a market into pieces, with customers
in each piece having unique needs and wants, for example,
using gender to slice the shoe market into male and female
shoes segments; and using price and quality to slice the air
travel market into budget and premium airlines segments.
Mechanical AI, especially the various mining and grouping
techniques, has the strength of identifying novel patterns from
data.
AI segmentation is flexible, in that it can disaggregate the
market into segments of one (i.e., each individual customer is
a segment) and can aggregate scattered long tails into one

38

segment. Wang et al. (2017) demonstrate that transfer learning
can be used to model the tail of the distribution, by learning
from the head of the distribution and transferring the learning
to the data-poor tail. This flexibility in aggregation and disaggregation allows marketers to find the right size of segment.
Existing studies have shown how data mining can be used
to uncover patterns that are difficult for human marketers to
see. For example, text-mining and machine learning can be
used to automatically process and analyze loan requests to
slice borrowers into good customers (those will pay back the
loan) and bad customers (those will not) (Netzer et al. 2019),
automated text analysis and correspondence analysis can be
used for psychographic consumer segmentation in the art market (Pitt et al. 2020), data mining can be used to obtain tourist
segments based on the meaning of destinations to consumers,
that is better than the classic clustering methods (Valls et al.
2018), and retail customers can be micro-segmented based on
their preferences for personalized recommendation (Dekimpe
2020).
Targeting
Targeting is choosing the right segment(s) on which to focus
the firm’s marketing actions. Slicing the market is more mechanical and can be done automatically by mechanical AI,
given the relevant data. However, choosing the right segment
requires domain knowledge, judgement, and intuition.
Various technologies and analytics have been used for
targeting, such as search engines using keywords searched
and browsing history to target search consumers, and social
media platforms using interests, content, and connections to
target social media consumers (Liu 2020). The representative
AI for this decision is recommendation engines that can recommend various potential targets for marketing managers’
final verdict, and predictive modeling that can be used to
choose which segment to target.
Existing studies show that various thinking AI can be used
for this purpose. Examples include targeting customers using a
combination of statistical and data-mining techniques (Drew
et al. 2001), screening and targeting cancer outreach marketing
using machine learning and causal forests (Chen et al. 2020),
optimizing promotion targeting for new customers using various machine learning methods (Simester et al. 2020), identifying the best targets for proactive churn programs from field
experimental data using machine learning techniques (Ascarza
2018), and profiling digital consumers for targeting using online browsing data (Neumann et al. 2019).
Positioning
Positioning bridges product attributes and customer benefits
by finding a competitively advantageous position for the product in customers’ minds. This term is often associated with

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2021) 49:30–50

brand positioning or advertising positioning for its association
with customer perceptions and communications to maintain a
desirable perception. Daabes and Kharbat (2017) demonstrate
how data mining techniques can be used to distill a customerbased perceptual map, as an alternative to marketer knowledge, from mining customers’ perceptions.
Compared with the mechanical-based segmentation and
the thinking-based targeting, positioning is more about speaking to customers’ hearts, typically as a positioning statement
or slogan in promotional communication. Gali et al. (2017)
find that tourism positioning slogans in top destinations tend
to emphasize the affective component.
Some successful positioning statements help brands to occupy a unique position in customers’ minds and thus succeed
in the market for a long time. For example, Nike’s “Just do it,”
Apple computer’s “Be different,” and McDonalds’ “I’m loving it” all communicate with customers by speaking to their
hearts. Feeling AI, such as feeling analytics, is ideal for this
strategic decision to help develop compelling slogans by understanding what resonates with target customers.
Academic research on this decision is sparse, indicating a
research gap for using feeling AI to create compelling
positioning.

Marketing action
At this strategic stage, marketers can use mechanical AI for
standardization, thinking AI for personalization, and feeling
AI for relationalization (Huang and Rust 2020). Depending on
which benefit is desirable, a marketer can use multiple AI
intelligences individually or collectively. We illustrate the
use of AI intelligences in various areas of marketing with
examples and current and future scenarios, and support the
illustration using the existing literature. The discussion is organized by marketing 4Ps (product, price, place, and promotion) (Kotler and Keller 2006) and the corresponding 4Cs
(consumer, cost, convenience, and communication)
(Lauterborn 1990) to emphasize that the 4P actions need to
be able to deliver consumer benefits.
Product (consumer)
Product (consmer) actions include goods and services as offerings to meet the consumer’s needs and wants. Such actions
typically include product design, packaging, branding, and
returns, and the associated customer services in these activities. We illustrate this decision using product/branding and
customer service, with product/branding representing the
“product” side and customer service representing the “consumer” side. Product and branding are related in that branding
is the identity (e.g., name, symbol, logo) of a product. We put
them together to maintain the simplicity of the table.

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2021) 49:30–50

Product/branding focuses on product creation (including
tangible goods R&D and production, and service innovation
and process) and branding (i.e., the identity of a product).
Mechanical AI can be used for product/branding actions
that can benefit from standardization. For example, brand logo
design can be automated by a decision-tree like machine
learning using multiple-choice questions, allowing small budget marketers to have AI-assisted branding (Avery 2018).
Product adoption and acceptance can be tracked and monitored automatically. While enjoying the standardization benefit of mechanical AI, one existing study is cautious about
automating product decisions, when those products are related
to consumers’ identity (Leung et al. 2018).
Thinking AI can be used for product/branding actions that
can benefit from personalization. For example, marketing analytics can predict market trends for product design that cater
more precisely to target customers’ preferences, big data analytics can be used to inform product development to quickly adapt
to consumer trends and changing preferences (Dekimpe 2020),
topic modeling can advance service innovation and design
(Antons and Breidbach 2018), adaptive systems can be used
to personalize service to each consumer’s preference (Chung
et al. 2009; Chung et al. 2016; Dzyabura and Hauser 2019;
Liebman et al. 2019), and deep learning can be used to personalize point-of-interest recommendations (Guo et al. 2018).
Feeling AI can be used for product/branding actions that
can benefit from relationalization. For example, conversational AI can be trained to have brand personality to interact with
customers (Wilson and Daugherty 2018), machine learning
can recommend TV programs based on the viewer’s mood,
brands can track their reputation through text and sentiment
analyses tweets, reviews, and social media posts (Rust et al.
2020), and chatbots can mimic customers’ communication
style to provide emotional support. Kumar et al. (2019) provide a systematic exploration about the role of AI in personalized engagement marketing, an approach to create,
communicate, and deliver personalized offering to
customers. Huang and Rust (2020) show that feeling AI can
be used to engage customers in service interaction.
From the consumer side, existing studies further show that
customers have varying responses and attitudes toward using
AI products. For example, consumers may be resistant to personal medical AI (Longoni et al. 2019), identity-based consumption automation (Leung et al. 2018), and anthropomorphized consumer robots (Kim et al. 2019; Mende et al. 2019).
These studies put a boundary condition for marketers when
using AI in the product/branding actions to generate positive
customer responses.
Customer service is emotionally charged, yet is also costly.
A marketer can handle customer service using the three AI
intelligences to balance the cost/satisfaction tradeoff in serving customers.

39

Mechanical AI, such as text-based chatbots, is widely used
online to handle a massive amount of routine customer service. Most customer questions can be answered by such bots.
As long as such automation is not related to customers’ identity (Leung et al. 2018), it is easy to implement, cost-efficient,
and scales up easily.
Thinking AI, such as natural language processing chatbots,
can handle more diversified customers and idiosyncratic issues (e.g., multicultural customers with accents and
contextual-dependent complaints). This is an AI version of
the old telephone menu, except that customers are talking to
chatbots, rather than human customer service agents.
Although a recent study shows that customers may not feel
comfortable yet about talking to chatbots (Luo et al. 2019),
with the wider acceptance of AI and the further advance of
chatbots, we can expect the acceptance to increase over time.
Feeling AI, such as Cogito’s emotional AI systems, can
analyze the pace of speaking, energy and empathy, and common errors of conversations, and gives in-call guidance to
customer service agents in call centers that make the conversations more natural and engaging.

Price (cost)
Price (cost) action includes the tasks of payment, price setting,
and price negotiation, which is the cost that the consumer pays
for the product.
The payment task is routine and can be handled best by
mechanical AI. Apple Pay, Google Pay, PayPal, Amazon
Payments, and Square are some popular automatic payment
methods for online marketers.
The price setting task is calculation-intensive and analytical, which is the strength of thinking AI. Misra et al. (2019)
demonstrate that multiarmed bandit algorithms from statistical
machine learning can dynamically adjust online prices in realtime, even if price information is incomplete. Bauer and
Jannach (2018) show that a machine-learning framework
based on Bayesian inference can optimize online pricing even
when data are updated frequently, and are sparse and noisy.
Prices can also be personalized by incorporating consumer
online WOM (Feng et al. 2019) and consumers’ private personal information (Montes et al. 2019). Dekimpe (2020) proposes that retailers can use big data to optimize dynamic bestresponse pricing algorithms that consider consumer choices,
competitor actions, and supply parameters.
The price negotiation task is interactive; thus, feeling AI is
in a better position to undertake this task. Pulles and Hartman
(2017) hypothesize that interpersonal likeability would impact
the price negotiation outcome in a B2B relationship, suggesting that interaction, communication, and sentiment may be
critical for price negotiation.

40

Place (convenience)
Place (convenience) is the way that the consumer can access
the product. We discuss two broad categories of place action:
Retailing and frontline, virtually or physically, in which interactions play a key role; and distribution, logistics, and delivery, in which convenience is the key.
Retailing/frontline is the area of marketing that most employs embodied AI (i.e., robots) to facilitate frontline
interactions.
Mechanical AI can be used to automate backend marketing
processes and frontend interactions. In the backend, service
processes can be automated (Huang and Rust 2018) and retail
processes can be optimized using IoT (Grewal et al. 2018). In
the frontend, service robots can interact with scale and consistency (Wirtz et al. 2018), and can automate social presence in
the frontline (Mende et al. 2019; van Doorn et al. 2017).
Frontline service robots are common; for example, Giant grocery uses the robot Marty to identify hazards in store (e.g.,
detecting milk spilled on the floor) and HaiDiLao hotpot uses
robots to deliver soup base from kitchen to table side. Grocery
shopping is typically repeat purchase, which does not involve
too much interaction, communication, and emotion, and thus
using mechanical AI to automate the marketing function is
desirable.
At the thinking level, due to the direct customer contact
nature of retailing, AI is used to facilitate in-store shopping
for individual customers. Amazon Go, an experimental grocery store, uses facial recognition technology to identify and
remember each customer, Macy’s On Call, a mobile shopping
personal aid, provides in-store information to help customers
locate items they are looking for, and Alibaba’s FashionAI
system uses smart mirrors in sales floor and changing rooms
to display items that each customer selects and suggests complementary items.
Feeling AI can be used to enhance interaction and engagement. For example, service robots can easily do surface acting
(Wirtz et al. 2018), and “one-voice” AI can enhance customer
engagement by integrating various interfaces involved in a
customer’s journey (Singh et al. 2020). At the feeling level,
various embodied robots are used to engage customers and
optimize their experience. For example, Pepper robots are
used by Marriott to greet and interact with customers. Hotels
and travel typically involve more interactions and more emotions, and thus feeling AI naturally suits. Nevertheless, marketers need to be cautious, in that anthropomorphized robots
are found to increase perceived warmth but decrease liking
(Kim et al. 2019); thus, in the case of embodied frontline
robots, marketers need to take the appearance of robots into
consideration.
Distribution/logistics/delivery is an area of marketing in
which many functions and processes can be highly automated;
including packaging, inventory, warehousing, supply chain,

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2021) 49:30–50

logistics, and delivery, to provide convenience benefits to
customers.
Tasks in distribution are mostly mechanical, routine, and
repetitive; thus, the standardization benefit of mechanical AI
fits well. We have seen cobots for packaging, drones for delivery, IoT for consumption tracking and order refilling, and
self-service technologies for delivering service to customers
directly. Such standardization provides a convenience benefit
to customers.
Moving up to the thinking AI level, we have seen that a
customer’s future orders and refills can be anticipated by predictive analytics, and ordered products can be delivered to
customers using autonomous cars equipped with facial recognition technology (e.g., JD.com and Domino’s use selfdriving cars for delivery).
So far, feeling AI is not as widely used as the other two AI
intelligences for this marketing action, due to distribution’s
mechanical and thinking nature.
Promotion (communication)
Promotion (communication) is the marketing communications between the consumer and the marketer. It can include
personal selling, traditional mass media advertising, and more
commonly nowadays direct marketing, database marketing,
and digital marketing (social media marketing, mobile marketing, search engine optimization, etc.). All these can benefit
from AI intelligences.
Mechanical AI is ideal for automating various repetitive, routine, and data intensive functions of promotion
(Huang and Rust 2018). Most of these are about promotional media planning and executions. Examples include
automating advertising media planning, scheduling, and
buying; automating search campaigns execution, keywords researching, and bidding; automating social media
targeting, retargeting, and posting. Especially considering
the real-time nature of digital marketing, such automation
greatly aids marketers’ efforts in the labor-intensive, hightime-pressure process.
Thinking AI has great potential for promotion content creation and personalization. For example, AI content writers can
facilitate the generation of ad or post content. A recent example was a Lexus car commercial that used IBM Watson to
create the “Driven by Intuition” commercial script. Content
can be personalized and optimized to different customer profiles at different locations and different times. Kantar
Analytics uses content analytics to help advertisers create content that shortens the idea-to-value time and maximizes content effectiveness (Gopinath 2019).
Feeling AI can be used to track real-time customer response to promotional messages (like, dislike, disgusted, funny, etc.) and then adjust what to deliver and what to emphasize
in both media and content. At the feeling level, more real-time

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2021) 49:30–50

and accurate emotion sensing from posted messages can better
engage customers and provide a better interaction experience
(Hartmann et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2018).

Managerial implications
Our framework provides a roadmap for marketers to implement various AI intelligences in marketing, strategically and
systematically. Table 4 summarizes the managerial implications of the framework by contrasting current marketing practice with the emerging AI-enabled marketing practice. The
two practices should be viewed as two ends of a continuum,
with more AI intelligences expected to be used for more strategic elements at the three stages over time. We discuss these
implications below.

Implications for marketing research
At this stage, marketers need to decide (1) how to use AI to
identify competitors (including competitors in the same industry and outside options) and to understand competitive advantages (i.e., the way the product can do better to meet customers’ needs), and (2) how to use AI to discover and understand existing and potential customers (i.e., who they are,
what they want, and what their current solutions are) and to
understand their preferences and feelings. For firms that embrace a theory-driven approach to marketing strategies, data
and intelligences resulting from this stage play a critical role.
Data collection Currently, surveys, experiments, interviews,
panels, and sales data are still the major approaches for marketers to obtain data, even though the administration of these
methods can be partially automated or facilitated by technology. Surveys and experimental methods tend to be more theory driven, while other methods tend to be more data driven.
Marketers often also rely on thirty-party syndicated data (e.g.,
YouGov), especially for external data that are difficult for the
firm to collect. These data are typically delayed, out of context, and ad hoc, meaning that they are collected periodically,
after the fact (after consumption has occurred), and not during
data generation.
By contrast, emerging practices automate most of the data
collection by connecting technology (e.g., IoT, social networking sites, mobile apps), sensor technology (e.g., remote sensing,
detection), and wearable technology (e.g., smart watch, Fitbit).
These mechanical AI approaches track and capture real-time
data when they are occurring. Thus, the data are in context,
about the customer, and during the consumption experience.
Such spontaneous data collection tends to be more data driven,
but if theories can be developed priori to guide and update the
continuous data collection, they can be theory driven as well.

41

Market analysis Current market analysis, although marching
toward machine learning-based analysis rapidly, still relies
heavily on statistical analysis to analyze structured data for
marketing insights. It is also common for firms to purchase
third-party data and analysis, especially for external market
and competitor analysis. Such analysis tends to be standardized across firms (with limited degree of customization), and
thus the insights derived from it are less useful for deriving a
unique value proposition. Firms also monitor and analyze
first-party data, especially for firm marketing resource analysis and for existing customer analysis for which internal data
are available.
By contrast, big data and machine learning-based analytics
are the emerging approach for marketing insights. Online reviews, opinions, and behaviors all can be mined, and data can
be in text, image, audio, or video. When the question at hand
is clear (e.g., a mature brand), supervised machine learning
can be used to conduct theory-driven analysis, whereas when
the question at hand is unclear (e.g., a new brand), unsupervised machine learning can be applied to obtain data-driven
insights. Balducci and Marinova (2018) offer a detailed description of various methods of analyzing unstructured data in
marketing. More advanced approaches to marketing analysis
include using deep learning methods such as predictive analytics, computational creativity, personalization algorithms,
and natural language processing systems, to come up with
intuitive suggestions for marketing strategies.
Customer understanding Current practice relies heavily on
focus groups to gain qualitative insights about customers.
Focus groups are time consuming and labor intensive, not to
mention not representative. Marketers also observe customers’ behaviors and choices, and their reactions to promotions to understand their preferences and the underlying
reasons.
By contrast, data about customers’ feelings, moods, and
emotions can be obtained directly from customers’ interaction
with AI (e.g., conversational bots), rather than inferred from
psychometrics, using conversational bots and analyzed using
feeling analytics (e.g., posts on social media, voice recordings
of customer interactions, and chat transcripts). Feeling analytics can identify customer insights with scale and cost-efficiently. Given that emotional data are personal and in context,
understanding customers in context provides richer insights
about who they are and what they like.

Implications for marketing strategy (STP)
At this stage, marketers can leverage the three AI intelligences
for segmentation, targeting, and positioning, respectively. For
firms that embrace a data-driven approach to marketing strategy, this stage may play a bigger role than conclusions derived
from marketing research.

42
Table 4

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2021) 49:30–50
Managerial and research implications based on the three-tier strategic framework
Current practice

Emerging practice

Marketing research
• Integrated multiple sources of data collected
automatically by mechanical AI (e.g., IoT,
sensors, and wearables)
• Unstructured behavioral, opinion, and sentiment
data
• Data are real-time, during a customer’s
experience, and in context
Market analysis • Statistical analysis for structured data
• Big data analytics for unstructured data
• Theory-driven hypothesis testing
• Data-driven exploration
Customer
• Qualitative focus groups for customer insights • Feeling analytics for customer insights with scale
understand- • Observe customer behavior, choice, and
• Understand customers in their own words and
ing
reactions to marketing actions
expression
• Psychometrics for inferring customer thinking • Direct insights from customer interactions with
and feeling
conversational AI
• Deep learning and NLP for contextual customer
thinking and feeling
Marketing strategy (STP)
Segmentation
• Segment based on a few variables a priori
• Discover novel segments based on unlimited
• Aggregate customer equity model (e.g.,
number of variables
acquisition rate, churn rate)
• Individual customer lifetime value model (i.e.,
segmentation of one)
Targeting
• Target segments
• Target individuals more
• Trade off target segment size and effectiveness • Flexible targeting and retargeting (aggregate and
disaggregate)
Positioning
• Human judgment and intuition
• AI-based optimization of positioning

Data collection

• Scattered surveys, experiments, interviews,
panels, sales (e.g., scanner data), and
syndicated data (e.g., TNS)
• Semi-structured behavioral big data
• Data are delayed, out of context, and ad hoc

Product/
Consumer

• Conjoint analysis decides attribute levels
• Market testing
• Aggregate sales as customer adoption
• Product life cycle

Price/
Cost

• Price menu on websites or apps
• Segment-based price discrimination
• Humans handle price negotiations

• Self-service/physical distribution
• Unskilled labor provides homogeneous
shopping assistance
• Frontline employees’ variable emotional labor
Promotion/
• Skilled labor-intensive media planning
Communication • Relying on creative executives’ talent
• Delayed response to customer reactions to
promotions

Place/
Convenience

Marketing action (4Ps/4Cs)
• Mechanical AI automates service and product
process
• Thinking AI for product innovation
• Feeling AI for service interaction
• Customer value
• Mechanical AI automates price setting and
updating
• Thinking AI personalizes pricing
• Feeling AI negotiates and bids prices
• Mechanical AI automates distribution, logistics,
and delivery
• Thinking AI personalizes shopping
• Feeling AI interacts with customers
• Mechanical AI automates promotional executions
and media planning
• Thinking AI for content creativity
• Feeling AI for emotion sensing and reaction

Segmentation The current approach relies on the marketer’s
intuition and domain knowledge to choose a limited number
of segmentation variables with which to slice the market, such
as demographics, psychographics, and behavioral variables.
Such an approach sees customers as aggregate, not individual.
For example, some customer equity models focus on
segmenting customers based on their acquisition and churn
rates, and do not see them as individually unique (e.g.,
Blattberg and Deighton 1996; Gupta et al. 2004). Artificial
personas thus are often applied to these segments to help

Future research

How would privacy and data security
affect marketing’s use of AI for data
collection?

How to balance data- and
theory-driven market analysis?
What algorithms and models are
needed for feeling AI?

How best to visualize segmentation?

What happens when the customer is
AI?
How should marketers and AI
collaborate, to resonate with
customers?
How is AI best used in developing new
products to meet customer needs
and wants?

How to manage AI-based price negotiation?

How to manage customer
disengagement due to place
automation?
How to use AI to build strong
relational bonds?

marketers make the aggregate segments more personal and
relatable.
By contrast, when data mining is used to segment the market, it no longer requires marketers to decide segmentation
variables on an a priori basis, because unsupervised machine
learning can discover the patterns itself. A virtually unlimited
number of variables can be used to slice the market in a novel
way that often goes beyond any pattern that human marketers
can see. It is like the customer lifetime value model, in which
each customer is valuable in some way. The Target store

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2021) 49:30–50

knowing a daughter is pregnant before her father knows, by
mining the daughter’s purchase patterns, is a classic example.
Targeting Currently targeting mostly uses marketers’ subjective judgment, based on the resources, the competitive advantage of the firm, and the value of the segment to the firm. It is
typically at the segment level (not individual level), and often
trades off segment size for effectiveness.
By contrast, after very refined segmentation, it is thinking AI’s turn to recommend the best segment(s) to target.
It is very well likely to be a segment of one, since personalization is the strength of thinking AI. With the capability to slice the market in unlimited ways and at the
individual customer level, targeting in emerging practice
is more commonly at the individual customer level. For
example, online ads use cookies to target individual customers by following them around, wherever they go on
the Internet. The new targeting also is flexible, because it
can aggregate individual customers into a segment, if they
have similar preferences (e.g., like-minded customers recommendation, aggregating long-tail customers even when
each individual customer may not be valuable), or it can
disaggregate a segment, if heterogeneity within the segment becomes manifest. Targeting involves not just identifying segments but also determining whether they
should be pursued. Whether they should be pursued or
not is a matter of predicting the outcome if they pursue,
and prediction at the individual level is only scalable with
the help of AI.
Positioning
Positioning is currently a human task, for it involves judgment,
intuition, and creativity that machines are not particularly good at
it yet (Davis and Marcus 2015; Schoenick et al. 2017). Kelly
(2019) argues that creativity is not just about novelty but is also
about social acceptability. A novel idea has to be accepted by
community to be deemed as creative. Because creativity is socially embedded, a good positioning is in the eye of the targeted
customers. Although we have seen an increasing number of examples of AI participating in the creative process, for example
using AI to compose its own music and to write short stories,
there is still a long way to go for AI to be as creative as humans
while still maintaining strategic relevance. For example, the
script of the 2018 Lexus car “Driven by Intuition” TV commercial was created by AI by applying the machine learning approach. Lexus fed machines with award-winning luxury ads,
Lexus brand data, and emotion data, that were shown to connect
with viewers, to tell the story about how Lexus generated the new
ES executive saloon car. The commercial appears to have face
validity as a luxury car commercial. However, this commercial
may not be very strategic because the ad has an unclear customer
segmentation and ambiguous positioning (Rust and Huang

43

2020). This real-world example illustrates that positioning can
be expected to be a human-AI collaboration for the immediate
future.

Implications for marketing action
At this stage, marketers can leverage the three AI intelligences
for the 4Ps to serve the 4Cs. The key questions to answers are
which AI to use and how to use it for marketing actions.
Product The current practice for product decisions is to use
conjoint analysis to decide what levels of product attributes to
include in product development, use test markets to decide
whether and to what degree the product will be accepted,
and use aggregate sales results after the launch of the product
as a proxy for customer feedback.
The emerging practice is to use mechanical AI to automate
production and service process (e.g., Huang and Rust 2020), use
thinking AI, such as cognitive technology, to facilitate product
research and development (which is currently more common in
drug development), and use feeling AI, such social robots and
conversational bots, to interact with customers, from which they
obtain real-time, first-hand customer feedback about the product. Such a process can become an adaptive loop that improves
the product continuously based on customer feedback.
Price The current practice is to list prices on retail stores, websites,
or mobile apps, set the prices discriminately, based on segments,
and have salespeople handle price negotiations. Price menus
offline are difficult and labor intensive to change, and price menus
online, though easier to update, are also easier to be compared.
Price setting typically requires careful and extensive calculation,
taking various factors into consideration. Price negotiation is more
of an art than a science, especially for big ticket items.
The emerging practice is to use mechanical AI to automate
price setting and changes, thinking AI for price personalization, and feeling AI for price negotiation. Price updating is a
simple routine task, price setting can be achieved by the powerful calculating machine, thinking AI, and can be personalized taking individual customers’ preferences and sensitivity
into consideration. Price negotiation can be done when feeling
AI detects customer reactions to the offered price in real-time.
Place The current practice relies on self-service to automate
routine delivery and labor-intensive physical distribution for
ordering processing, materials handling, and delivery; unskilled labor at the frontline to offer homogeneous assistance,
and frontline employees for emotional labor.
Distribution, logistics, and delivery can mostly be automated with mechanical AI, and is a fast-growing emerging practice, for example, product tracking systems for firms to track
where the product is in the supply chain, and for customers to
track when they can expect to receive the product. Thinking

44

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2021) 49:30–50

AI, such as personal shopping assistants, has been used to
assist customers about where to find the product. Feeling AI,
such as conversational bots, can be used to display emotions
in service interaction without the need to actually experience
emotions (Wirtz et al. 2018).
Promotion The media planning part of promotion has a higher
degree of automation by mechanical AI, due to the repetitive
nature of the task. The content creation part of promotion, though
having a lower degree of automation, is increasingly handled by
thinking AI, such as AI writers, to generate content on its own, or
to stimulate human creativity. Customers’ reactions to promotion
are still mostly measured using traditional marketing research
methods. The emerging practice is to use feeling AI, such as
feeling analytics, to sense, react, and adjust promotions in realtime based on customers’ emotional reactions.

Directions for future research

&

The framework lays out a stage-by-stage circular process for
using different AI intelligences in marketing. It provides rich
implications for future research based on the use of AI intelligences. We discuss these implications, organized by the
three AI intelligences. The last column of Table 4 illustrates
one example research question for each element.

Marketing research
When mechanical AI is used for data collection, it makes both
the competition and the customer more transparent, making
the governance of privacy issues more central to marketers.
When thinking AI is used for market analysis, it turns theorydriven marketing research into data-driven, resulting in a debate about whether a data or theory approach to marketing
research should be embraced. When feeling AI is used for
customer understanding, it is as if AI can really understand
emotions, when we don’t have true emotional machines yet.
These issues give rise to various future research topics.
&

How would privacy and data security affect marketing’s
use of AI for data collection? When mechanical AI is used
to collect and integrate multiple sources of real-time, incontext consumer data, the risk of privacy infringement
and the consequences of a data breach are much higher.
It is more difficult to keep such “all-in-one” data anonymous, and consumers are more sensitive to data sharing
and data breaches. We have seen the public outcry when
Facebook permitted the unauthorized licensing of 30 million user accounts to Cambridge Analytica, with its brand
reputation plummeting dramatically in two weeks (Rust
et al. 2020). In the AI age, both competition and customers
become more transparent, due to AI’s data collection

&

capability. How should privacy and data security be handled? The existing studies suggest that both data and
consumer characteristics need to be considered. It has
been shown that some types of data are more sensitive,
such as personal data, financial data, health data, or
medical records. Agarwal et al. (2020) urge healthcare
organizations to find ways of protecting patient privacy
as a competitive advantage, because healthcare consumers
are especially weak in protecting their own data. It has also
been shown that some consumers are more sensitive to
data sharing. Thomaz et al. (2020) identify two types of
consumers who vary in willingness to share information.
They advise that marketers need to understand which type
of consumers they are dealing with when providing personalization. Some methods of protecting marketing data
have been proposed (Schneider et al. 2017, 2018). Future
research will need to explore more delicate approaches to
handle the ubiquitous data collected by AI.
How to balance data- and theory-driven market analysis?
Traditional market research has the strength of hypothesis testing, whereas the emerging machine
learning approach to analyzing unstructured big data
has the merit of data exploration. How to balance
the two approaches of inquiry and benefit from
them? The Silicon Valley viewpoint is that prediction, driven by data, is everything. Balducci and
Marinova (2018) show a data-driven approach to
marketing management and research and Ma and
Sun (2020) argue for machine learning methods for
marketing research, while Lehmann (2020) proposes
a method to blend theory and data in the evolving
world of marketing research. These practices and
studies suggest that AI will expand the role of exploration in the development of theory; thus, investigating how the two approaches can be balanced,
integrated, or blended would allow marketing to leverage the benefit of data-driven market analysis.
What algorithms and models are needed for feeling AI?
Much of the progress in technical algorithms has been
made in the area of deep learning neural networks, applied
to thinking AI problems, such as personalized advertising.
The current neural network-based machine learning is
mainly for prediction, rather than for understanding. We
need algorithms to understand emotions and react to emotions appropriately (Rust and Huang 2020). There are different ways to understand emotions, such as understanding emotions in written language (text-based sentiment
analysis), in oral conversation (natural language processing), or in facial expression (facial recognition). Although
there is some work already in using thinking AI to analyze
emotional data (e.g., affective analytics), with respect to
facial recognition and natural language processing,
models in this area are still fairly rudimentary.

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2021) 49:30–50

45

Marketing strategy

Marketing action

For the three strategic elements of segmentation, targeting,
and positioning, mechanical AI can slice the market based
on virtually an unlimited number of variables, thinking AI
can recommend the target, even if it is a segment of AI customers, or a combination of AI and human customers, and
feeling AI can team up with marketers to come up with creative positioning that touches consumers’ hearts. We discuss
these implications.

For the four strategic elements of 4Ps/4Cs, as illustrated in
Table 4, all three AI intelligences can be applied to each element. We illustrate one research question for each of the elements, highlighting the level of AI intelligence that is likely to
help the most.

&

&

&

How best to visualize segmentation? The emerging AI approach to segmentation can be based on an unlimited number of variables. This creates a challenge as to how best to
visualize for marketers to make sense of these multidimensional segmentation results for targeting. Thinking
AI can easily decipher such complexity, but human marketers may not. Earlier studies have attempted to visually
display three-dimensional segmentation and positioning
from a larger set of variables (e.g., Donthu and Rust
1989; Rust et al. 1992). There are some existing tools, but
they are not designed for STP decisions. We need better
and friendlier human-computer interfaces to summarize
and display those extremely high dimensional results to
inform human marketers.
What happens when the customer is AI? Alexa and Siri
are not the only AI that can potentially buy things.
Increasingly, customers use AI as their agents for information collection, price negotiation, or purchase. When it
becomes more real that marketers will be catering to nonhuman customers (Rust 1997, 2020) or a combination of
humans and AI as customers, how AI customers would
behave, and how marketers should serve them are both
pertinent issues. Are customer emotions still pertinent?
Will rational decision making become the only route to
decisions? How will AI customers change the scope of
consumer research?
How should marketers and AI collaborate, to resonate
with customers? Positioning requires creativity and empathy about the preferred way that a customer would like to
see a product. AI can optimize a positioning recommendation, but may not be mature enough to resonate with
customers, given that we do not have true feeling AI yet.
Thus, for the time being, it is important to explore the best
approaches to marketer-AI collaboration for a positioning
that resonates with customers. This is a question that involves exploring the role of AI intelligences in creativity;
for example, to what extent should marketers let machines
be creative on their own (e.g., the Lexus commercial example), or use them as creative support? What will be
consumers’ attitudes toward machine-generated creativity? What will decide the acceptance or rejection of machine creativity?

&

&

&

&

How is AI best used in developing new products to meet
customer needs and wants? Thinking AI can be innovative
and creative, but it may not be straightforward as to whether the new products will meet customer needs and wants,
because many of those needs and wants are implicit, rather
than explicit. This is the challenge of converting product
attributes into consumer benefits. Rogers’ (1962) diffusion of innovation theory suggests that both consumer
and product innovativeness matter for new product acceptance. AI, with its capability to find patterns and regularities in data that otherwise would be hard to see, can be
used to uncover consumers’ implicit needs and wants, and
match those needs and wants to products at different
stages of lifecycle. For example, for the earlier stages of
product lifecycle, AI may play a bigger role, because consumers’ needs and wants tend to be implicit, whereas for
the latter stages, human marketers may play a bigger role,
because those needs and wants become more explicit.
How to manage AI-based price negotiation? Negotiating
price to achieve price personalization can be expected to
be more common and increasingly at the individual level
(e.g., price bidding). The price discrimination literature
(e.g., Montes et al. 2019) tends to view pricing as a process of marketers setting the price and consumers reacting
to the price. In AI-based price negotiation, the process is
dynamic and real-time. We have seen the popularity for
technology giants to use AI for price negotiation, such as
Google’s search keywords bidding and Facebook’s ad
bidding for reaching the desirable customers. What will
be the new mechanisms and methods for pricing when AI
is used to negotiate prices more widely?
How to manage customer disengagement due to place
automation? The goal of the place decision is to provide
the customer a convenience benefit. When the entire place
process is automated, which is increasingly common these
days, there is no human-to-human contact, and thus it is
likely for customers to become less engaged with the
brand. How to avoid customer disengagement while striving to provide convenience? Are there ways to mitigate
the part that is lost?
How to use AI to build strong relational bonds? When
two-way communications and interactions are made easier
and richer by AI, how are trust and commitment affected
by interacting with AI? What will be gained, and what will
be lost? Customers may have changed by interacting with

46

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2021) 49:30–50

AI. For example, when AI does more thinking, will customers think less when they may feel more? To what extent does the advance of AI, from mechanical, to thinking,
to feeling, lead to customers feeling more, at the expense
of thinking, such as accepting fake news on social media
at face value?

Current limitations of AI
Our strategic framework illustrates applications of multiple AI
intelligences to various areas of marketing at different strategic decision stages. These applications are not without limitations. We discuss the major limitations of applying the three
AI intelligences to marketing for marketers to use AI more
wisely.

Limitations of mechanical AI
Although current mechanical AI has the strong capability of
collecting and integrating multiple sources of data autonomously, very often contexts of the data are lost, creating problems in modeling, especially for emotional data. The automated process of data collection also makes customer intimacy
less achievable because it is machines talking to machines.
Non-contextual data Many data collected by mechanical
AI are non-contextual. This is especially the case for emotional data because such data are about the individual in
context, meaning modeling the emotional state of a consumer requires contextual and individual-specific data.
Contextual data are often lost during interaction. One
Dell AI expert said at a frontline service conference in
2019 that it is not that difficult to model emotions (meaning using the existing machine learning approach), but the
difficulty lies in that emotional data are difficult to capture, and thus are not analyzed. For example, in a customer service interaction, the content and sentiment of the
conversations are recorded, but not the context of the
conversations. When an angry and frustrated customer
calls, his way of talking may be different, depending on
whether he is alone or with a group of friends, whether
the weather is gloomy or sunny, or whether the traffic is
jammed or smooth. Even if voice analytics can detect the
sentiment of his voice, it cannot provide guidance to the
customer agent as to why the customer is angry, and what
the best way to respond is (Rust and Huang 2020).
Machine to machine interactions Or communications are predicted to be the key emerging technology-enabled interactions
in digital environments (Yadav and Pavlou 2020). Examples
include an ATM getting authorization from the bank for a cash

withdrawal, and a refrigerator sensor sending inventory information to a vendor via IoT. Mechanical AI plays an important
role in those routine interactions; however, it may come at the
cost of customer intimacy (e.g., Treacy and Wiersma 1997).
To be able to figure out the customer side of strategy requires
customer data, collected and compiled by mechanical AI,
which is the only methodology that is powerful enough and
scalable enough to capture individual-level data. When customers are removed from the interactions, it is more challenging for marketers to remain intimate with customers. Machineto-machine interactions and communications will be a new
form of customer interactions that calls for more future studies
to tell marketers how to approach them, and how to keep a
balance between operational efficiency and customer
intimacy.

Limitations of thinking AI
Current thinking AI, though powerful, may not be neutral and
transparent, which can result in biased recommendations or
entail unintended consequences.
Opaque AI How thinking AI comes up with a certain recommendation often is not transparent to human marketers. The
current dominant machine learning approach to AI designs
machines to learn via a mapping mechanism (i.e., map input
pairs (X,Y) to output Y=F(X)), not via cognitive reasoning
(Lewis and Denning 2018). This results in the output being
unexplainable because it does not answer the “why” question.
Thus, there is a need for scholars to develop explainable AI so
that thinking AI can be used for trustworthy and fair marketing
exchanges (Rai 2020). Opaque AI also results in liability issues. If AI output is not transparent, when AI goes wrong,
marketers who use the AI are likely to be held accountable.
The accountability issue has emerged since the first fatal accident of an autonomous car. Thus, marketers, as AI users,
when using thinking AI for strategic decisions, need to strive
to use the most explainable AI, rather than just the most powerful AI, to keep the exchanges transparent to both the marketer and the customer.
AI biases Thinking AI is not neutral. If data input is erroneous
or biased, output is likely to be biased too. However, biased
input is not the only way AI bias can occur. For example, it
has been shown that for loan decisions, discriminatory results
can occur even if there is no bigotry programmed into the
system, and the system only seeks to maximize profit
(Ukanwa and Rust 2020). Researchers have also shown that
gender bias can occur without any conscious (or unconscious)
attempt to produce a biased outcome—using only an unbiased
algorithm (Lambrecht and Tucker 2019).
Marketing researchers have addressed some issues, such as
managers and management education underpreparing the next

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2021) 49:30–50

generation for feeling and emotional intelligence (Huang and
Rust 2018; Huang et al. 2019), and IoT may impose constraints and restrictions on consumer journeys (Hoffman and
Novak 2018; Novak and Hoffman 2019). Thus, in using
thinking AI for market analysis, for targeting, and for personalized marketing actions, marketers need to be aware of the
potential AI biases and have better knowledge about how AI
learns to avoid AI biases.

Limitations of feeling AI
Although using feeling AI for two-way interactions involving
humans and for analyzing human feelings and emotions is
common in marketing due to the high-touch nature of many
marketing functions (e.g., frontline interactions, customer service, and emotional ad appeals), we don’t yet have true emotional machines that can recognize, act, and react to human
emotions appropriately. The substitutive use of mechanical
and thinking AI for feeling AI may generate some unintended
consequences.
Technology unreadiness The fact that marketers are using
“lower” intelligence AI for feeling functions (i.e., using mechanical AI to capture emotional data and using thinking AI to
analyze emotional data) may inflate the perceived capability
of AI to assist marketers in understanding customer emotions.
For example, marketers may overly rely on such feeing AI to
interact with customers, resulting in customer disengagement.
Srinivasan et al. (2016) find that higher levels of customer
activity on social media lead to disengagement (i.e.,
Facebook unlikes). Unlikes, as affective responses, may imply
that customer responses may be polarized more easily if technologies (social media in their study) are not able to interact
with customers appropriately.
Customer unreadiness Another consideration is that customers may not be ready for interacting with feeling AI. Luo
et al. (2019) find that many customers hang up on call-out
marketing chatbots once they realize they are talking to bots.
The Technology Readiness Index surveyed what people think
about AI in the workplace and only 10% consider feeling AI
to have the biggest impact in the past 5 years on their jobs,
indicating that customers are not aware that AI can “have”
feelings and may constitute a threat to their jobs (Espino
2019).

Contributions and conclusions
The most disruptive aspect of AI is that it replaces and improves upon human thinking capability. One of the most

47

revolutionary characteristics of modern thinking AI is its ability to personalize by analyzing big data in an automatic way.
This creates a quantum leap in marketing’s ability to target
individual customers. Marketing primarily requires thinking
intelligence and feeling intelligence. Until now there has been
only limited ability of technology to help with those things.
Now as thinking AI is advancing rapidly, it is gaining the
ability to assume many of the thinking tasks in marketing.
Eventually will even assume many of the feeling tasks in
marketing, as AI develops further. Such efforts are already
underway by researchers.
We see that marketers who cannot wait for technology to
sufficiently advance use mechanical AI and thinking AI for
feeling tasks, due to true feeling AI not being ready yet. We
also see that AI intelligences may not be used in the most
effective way (e.g., collecting customer data indiscriminately
or accepting AI recommendation blindly). Thus, we develop
this strategic framework to help marketers leverage the benefits of multiple AI intelligences for marketing impact. In this
framework, we lay out the ways in which various AI intelligences can be used in marketing research, marketing strategy
(STP), and marketing action (4Ps/4Cs). It shows the strategic
roles that AI can play in marketing, as well as points out the
limitations of current AI, to help marketers use AI wisely.
Funding This research was supported by grants (106-2410-H-002-056MY3 and 107–2410-H-002-115-MY3) from the Ministry of Science and
Technology, Taiwan.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons

Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were
made. The images or other third party material in this article are included
in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's
Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

References
Agarwal, R., Dugas, M., Gao, G., & Kannan, P. K. (2020). Emerging technologies and analytics for a new era of value-centered marketing in
healthcare. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 48(2), 9–23.
Ascarza, E. (2018). Retention futility: Targeting high-risk customers
might be ineffective. Journal of Marketing Research, 55(1), 80–98.
Autor, D. H., & Dorn, D. (2013). The growth of low-skill service jobs and
the polarization of the US labor market. American Economic
Review, 103(5), 1553–1597.
Avery, J. (2018). Tailor brands: Artificial intelligence-driven branding.
Harvard Business School Case 519–017, (August).

48
Avery, J., & Steenburgh, T. (2018). HubSpot and motion AI: Chatbotenabled CRM. Harvard Business School case 518-067, February.
Balducci, B., & Marinova, D. (2018). Unstructured data in marketing.
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 46(4), 557–590.
Bauer, J., & Jannach, D. (2018). Optimal pricing in e-commerce based on
sparse and noisy data. Decision Support Systems, 106(February), 53–63.
Berger, J., Humphreys, A., Ludwig, S., Moe, W. W., Netzer, O., &
Schweidel, D. A. (2019). Uniting the tribes: Using text for marketing insight. Journal of Marketing, 84(1), 1–25.
Blattberg, R. C., & Deighton, J. (1996). Manage marketing by the customer equity test. Harvard Business Review, 74(4), 136–144.
Chen, Y., Lee, J. Y., Sridhar, S., Mittal, V., McCallister, K., & Singal, A.
G. (2020). Improving cancer outreach effectiveness through
targeting and economic assessments: Insights from a randomized
field experiment. Journal of Marketing, 84(3), 1–27.
Chintagunta, P., Hanssens, D. M., & Hauser, J. R. (2016). Editorial—
Marketing science and big data. Marketing Science, 35(3), 341–342.
Chung, T. S., Wedel, M., & Rust, R. T. (2016). Adaptive personalization
using social networks. Journal of the Academy of Marketing
Science, 44(1), 66–87.
Chung, T. S., Rust, R. T., & Wedel, M. (2009). My mobile music: An
adaptive personalization system for digital audio players. Marketing
Science, 28(1), 52–68.
Colgate, E., Wannasuphoprasit, W., & Peshkin, M. (1996). Cobots:
Robots for collaboration with human operators. In Proceedings of
the ASME Dynamic Systems and Control Division, New York, 58,
433-439.
Cooke, A. D. J., & Zubcsek, P. P. (2017). The connected consumer:
Connected devices and the evolution of customer intelligence.
Journal of the Association for Consumer Research, 2(2), 164–178.
Daabes, A. S. A., & Kharbat, F. F. (2017). Customer-based perceptual
map as a marketing intelligence source. International Journal of
Economics and Business Research, 13(4), 360–379.
Davenport, T., Guha, A., Grewal, D., & Bressgott, T. (2020). How artificial intelligence will change the future of marketing. Journal of the
Academy of Marketing Science, 48(2), 24–42.
Davis, E., & Marcus, G. (2015). Commonsense reasoning and commonsense knowledge in artificial intelligence. Communications of the
ACM, 58(9), 93–103.
Dekimpe, M. (2020). Retailing and retailing research in the age of big
data analytics. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 37,
3–14.
Deming, W. E. (1986). Out of the Crisis. Cambridge: Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Center for Advanced Engineering Study.
Donthu, N., & Rust, R.T. (1989). Estimating geographic customer densities using kernel density estimation. Marketing Science, 8(2), 191–
203.
Drew, J. H., Mani, D. R., Betz, A. L., & Datta, P. (2001). Targeting
customers with statistical and data-mining techniques. Journal of
Service Research, 3(3), 205–219.
Dzyabura, D., & Hauser, J. R. (2011). Active machine learning for consideration heuristics. Marketing Science, 30(5), 757–944.
Dzyabura, D., & Hauser, J. R. (2019). Recommending products when
consumers learn their preferences weights. Marketing Science,
38(3), 365–541.
Espino, A. (2019). Artificial intelligence: A snapshot into the future. The
National Technology Readiness Survey, https://rockresearch.com/
artificial-intelligence-snapshot-future/.
Feng, J., Li, X., & Zhang, X. (2019). Online product reviews-triggered
dynamic pricing: Theory and evidence. Information Systems
Research, 30(4), 1107–1123.
Fountaine, T., McCarthy, B., & Saleh, T. (2019). Building the AIpowered organization. Harvard Business Review, July–August,
63–73.

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2021) 49:30–50
Frey, C. B., & Osborne, M. A. (2017). The future of employment: How
susceptible are jobs to computerisation? Technological Forecasting
and Social Change, 114(January), 254–280.
Gabel, S., Guhl, D., & Klapper, D. (2019). P2V-MAP: Mapping market
structures for large retail assortments. Journal of Marketing
Research, 56(4), 557–580.
Gali, N., Camprubi, R., & Donaire, J. A. (2017). Analyzing tourism
slogans in top tourism destinations. Journal of Destination
Marketing & Management, 6(3), 243–251.
Gopinath, D. (2019). Human + machine: How content analytics delivers
unsurpassed value to advertisers. MSI Lunch Lecture, (Sept 25).
Grewal, D., Motyka, S., & Levy, M. (2018). The evolution and future of
retailing and retailing education. Journal of Marketing Education,
40(1), 85–93.
Grewal, D., Noble, S. M., Roggeveen, A. L., & Nordfalt, J. (2020). The
future of in-store technology. Journal of the Academy of Marketing
Science, 48(2), 96–113.
Guo, J., Zhang, W., Fan, W., & Li, W. (2018). Combining geographical
and social influences with deep learning for personalized point-ofinterest recommendation. Journal of Management Information
Systems, 35(4), 1121–1153.
Gupta, S., Lehmann, D. R., & Stuart, J. A. (2004). Valuing customers.
Journal of Marketing Research, 41(1), 7–18.
Hartmann, J., Huppertz, J., Schamp, C. P., & Heitmann, M. (2019).
Comparing automated text classification methods. International
Journal of Research in Marketing, 36(1), 20–38.
Hewett, K., Rand, W., Rust, R. T., & van Heerde, H. (2016). Brand buzz
in the echoverse. Journal of Marketing, 80(3), 1–24.
Hoffman, D. L., & Novak, T. P. (2018). Consumer and object experience
in the internet of things: An assemblage theory approach. Journal of
Consumer Research, 44(6), 1178–1204.
Huang, M. H., & Rust, R. T. (2017). Technology-driven service strategy.
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 45(6), 906–924.
Huang, M. H., & Rust, R. T. (2018). Artificial intelligence in service.
Journal of Service Research, 21(2), 155–172.
Huang, M. H., & Rust, R. T. (2020). Engaged to a robot? The role of AI in
service. Journal of Service Research, 109467052090226. https://
doi.org/10.1177/1094670520902266.
Huang, M. H., Rust, R. T., & Maksimovic, V. (2019). The feeling economy: Managing in the next generation of artificial intelligence (AI).
California Management Review, 61(4), 43–65.
Humphreys, A., & Wang, R. (2018). Automated text analysis for consumer research. Journal of Consumer Research, 44(6), 1274–1306.
Kelly, S. D. (2019). What computers can’t create. MIT Technology
Review, 122(2), 68–75.
Kim, S. Y., Schmitt, B. H., & Thalmann, N. M. (2019). Eliza in the
uncanny valley: Anthropomorphizing consumer robots increases
their perceived warmth but decreases liking. Marketing Letters,
30(1), 1–12.
Kirkpatrick, K. (2020). Tracking shoppers. Communications of the ACM,
63(2), 19–21.
Kotler, P., & Keller, K. L. (2006). Marketing Management. Pearson
Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River.
Kumar, V., Rajan, B., Venkatesan, R., & Lecinski, J. (2019).
Understanding the role of artificial intelligence in personalized engagement marketing. California Management Review, 61(4), 135–
155.
Lambrecht, A., & Tucker, C. (2019). Algorithmic bias? An empirical
study of apparent gender-based discrimination in the display of
STEM career ads. Management Science, 65(7), 2966–2981.
Lauterborn, B. (1990). New marketing litany: Four Ps passé: C-words
take over. Advertising Age, 61(41), 26.

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2021) 49:30–50
Lee, D., Hosanagar, K., & Nair, H. S. (2018). Advertising content and
consumer engagement on social media: Evidence from Facebook.
Management Science, 64(11), 5105–5131.
Lehmann, D. R. (2020). The evolving world of research in marketing and
the blending of theory and data. International Journal of Research
in Marketing, 37(1), 27–42.
Leung, E., Paolacci, G., & Puntoni, S. (2018). Human versus machine:
Resisting automation in identity-based consumer behavior. Journal
of Marketing Research, 55(6), 818–831.
Lewis, T. G., & Denning, P. J. (2018). Learning machine learning.
Communications of the ACM, 61(12), 24–27.
Liebman, E., Saar-Tsechansky, M., & Stone, P. (2019). The right music
at the right time: Adaptive personalized playlists based on sequence
modeling. MIS Quarterly, 43(3), 765–786.
Liu, X. (2020). De-targeting to signal quality. International Journal of
Research in Marketing, 37(2), 386–404.
Liu, X., Singh, P. V., & Srinivasan, K. (2016). A structured analysis of
unstructured big data by leveraging cloud computing. Marketing
Science, 35(3), 363–388.
Longoni, C., Bonezzi, A., & Morewedge, C. K. (2019). Resistance to
medical artificial intelligence. Journal of Consumer Research, 46,
629–650.
Luo, X., Tong, S., Fang, Z., & Qu, Z. (2019). Frontiers: Machines versus
humans: The impact of AI chatbot disclosure on customer purchases. Marketing Science, 38(6), 937–947.
Ma, L., & Sun, B. (2020). Machine learning and AI in marketing –
Connecting computing power to human insights. International
Journal of Research in Marketing. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijresmar.2020.04.005.
McDuff, D., & Czerwinski, M. (2018). Designing emotionally sentient
agents. Communications of the ACM, 61(12), 74–83.
Mende, M., Scott, M. L., van Doorn, J., Grewal, D., & Shanks, I. (2019).
Service robots rising: How humanoid robots influence service experiences and elicit compensatory consumer responses. Journal of
Marketing Research, 56(4), 535–556.
Misra, K., Schwartz, E. M., & Abernethy, J. (2019). Dynamic online
pricing with incomplete information using multiarmed bandit experiments. Marketing Science, 38(2), 226–252.
Montes, R., Sand-Zantman, W., & Valletti, T. (2019). The value of personal information in online markets with endogenous privacy.
Management Science, 65(3), 1342–1362.
Netzer, O., Lemaire, A., & Herzenstein, M. (2019). When words sweat:
Identifying signals for loan default in the text of loan applications.
Journal of Marketing Research, 56(6), 960–980.
Neumann, N., Tucker, C. E., & Whitfield, T. (2019). Frontiers: How
effective is third-party consumer profiling? Evidence from field
studies. Marketing Science, 38(6), 918–926.
Ng, I. C. L., & Wakenshaw, S. Y. L. (2017). The internet-of-things:
Review and research directions. International Journal of Research
in Marketing, 34(1), 3–21.
Novak, T. P., & Hoffman, D. L. (2019). Relationship journeys in the
internet of things: A new framework for understanding interactions
between consumers and smart objects. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 47, 216–237.
Ordenes, F. W., Ludwig, S., De Ruyter, K., & Grewal, D. (2017).
Unveiling what is written in the stars: Analyzing explicit, implicit,
and discourse patterns of sentiment in social media. Journal of
Consumer Research, 43(6), 875–894.
Pitt, C. S., Bal, A. S., & Plangger, K. (2020). New approaches to psychographic consumer segmentation: Exploring fine art collectors using
artificial intelligence, automated text analysis and correspondence
analysis. European Journal of Marketing. https://doi.org/10.1108/
EJM-01-2019-0083.

49
Power, B. (2017). How Harley-Davidson used artificial intelligence to
increase New York sales leads by 2,930%. Harvard Business
Review digital article, (may 30), https://hbr.org/2017/05/howharley-davidson-used-predictive-analytics-to-increase-new-yorksales-leads-by-2930.
Pulles, N. J., & Hartman, P. (2017). Likeability and its effect on outcomes of
interpersonal interaction. Industrial Marketing Management, 66, 56–63.
Rai, A. (2020). Explainable AI: from black box to glass box. Journal of
the Academy of Marketing Science, 48(1), 137–141.
Rogers, E. M. (1962). Diffusion of innovations (1st ed.). New York: Free
Press of Glencoe.
Rust, R. T. (1997). The dawn of computer behavior: Interactive service
marketers will find their customer is not human. Marketing
Management, 6(fall), 31-34.
Rust, R. T. (2020). The future of marketing. International Journal of
Research in Marketing, 37(1), 15–26.
Rust, R. T., & Huang, M. H. (2020). The feeling economy: How artificial
intelligence is creating the era of empathy. Palgrave-Macmillan.
Rust, R.T., Kamakura, W.A., & Alpert, M.I. (1992). Viewer preference
segmentation and viewing choice models for network television.
Journal of Advertising, 21(1), 1–8.
Rust, R. T., Rand, W., Huang, M. H., Stephen, A. T., Brooks, G., &
Chabuk, T. (2020). Real-time brand reputation tracking using social
media. Working paper.
Schneider, M. J., Jagpal, S., Gupta, S., Li, S., & Yu, Y. (2017). Protesting
customer privacy when marketing with second-party data.
International Journal of Research in Marketing, 34(3), 593–603.
Schneider, M. J., Jagpal, S., Gupta, S., Li, S., & Yu, Y. (2018). A flexible
method for protecting marketing data: An application to point-ofsale data. Marketing Science, 37(1), 153–171.
Schoenick, C., Clark, P., Tafjord, O., Turney, P., & Etzioni, O. (2017).
Moving beyond the Turing test with the Allen AI science.
Communications of the ACM, 60(9), 60–64.
Simester, D., Timoshenko, A., & Zoumpoulis, S. I. (2020). Targeting
prospective customers: Robustness of machine-learning methods
to typical data challenges. Management Science, 66(6), 2495–2522.
Singh, J., Nambisan, S., Bridge, R. G., & Brock, J. (2020). One-voice
strategy for customer engagement. Journal of Service Research, 1–
24. https://doi.org/10.1177/1094670520910267.
Soleymanian, M., Weinberg, C. B., & Zhu, T. (2019). Sensor data and
behavioral tracking: Does usage-based auto insurance benefit
drivers? Marketing Science, 38(1), 21–43.
Srinivasan, S., Rutz, O. J., & Pauwels, K. (2016). Paths to and off purchase: Quantifying the impact of traditional marketing and online
consumer activity. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
44(4), 440–453.
Sutton, D. (2018). How AI helped one retailer reach new customers.
Harvard Business Review, (may 28), https://hbr.org/2018/05/howai-helped-one-retailer-reach-new-customers.
Thomaz, F., Salge, C., Karahanna, E., & Hulland, J. (2020). Learning
from the dark web: Leveraging conversational agents in the era of
hyper-privacy to enhance marketing. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 48(2), 43–63.
Timoshenko, A., & Hauser, J. R. (2019). Identifying customer needs from
user-generated content. Marketing Science, 38(1), 1–20.
Tong, S., Luo, X., & Xu, B. (2020). Personalized mobile marketing
strategies. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 48(2),
64–78.
Treacy, M., & Wiersema, F. (1997). The Discipline of Market Leaders.
Reading, MA: Perseus.
Ukanwa, K., & Rust, R. T. (2020). Discrimination in service. Working
paper.
Valls, A., Gibert, K., Orellana, A., & Anton-Clave, S. (2018). Using
ontology-based clustering to understand the push and pull factors

50
for British tourists visiting a Mediterranean coastal destination.
Information & Management, 55, 145–159.
van Doorn, J., Mende, M., Noble, S., Hulland, J., Ostrom, A., Grewal, D.,
& Petersen, A. (2017). Domo arigato Mr. Roboto: Emergence of
automated social presence in organizational frontlines and customers’ service experiences. Journal of Service Research, 20(1),
43–58.
Varki, S., Cooil, B., & Rust, R. T. (2000). Modeling fuzzy data in qualitative marketing research. Journal of Marketing Research, 37(4),
480–489.
Wang, Q., Li, B., & Singh, P. V. (2018). Copycats vs. original mobile
apps: A machine learning copycat-detection method and empirical
analysis. Information Systems Research, 29(2), 273–291.
Wang, Y. X., Ramanan, D., & Hebert, M. (2017). Learning to model the
tail. 31st conference on neural information processing systems
(NIPS).

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2021) 49:30–50
Wedel, M., & Kannan, P. K. (2016). Marketing analytics for data-rich
environments. Journal of Marketing, 80(6), 97–121.
Wilson, H. J., & Daugherty, P. R. (2018). Collaborative intelligence:
Humans and AI are joining forces. Harvard Business Review,
July–August, 114–123.
Wirtz, J., Patterson, P. G., Kunz, W. H., Gruber, T., Lu, V. N., Paluch, S.,
& Martins, A. (2018). Brave new world: Service robots in the frontline. Journal of Service Management, 29(5), 907–931.
Yadav, M. S., & Pavlou, P. A. (2020). Technology-enabled interactions
in digital environments: A conceptual foundation for current and
future research. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
48(2), 132–136.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

