Information Systems 106 (2022) 101842

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Information Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/is

A knowledge-centered framework for exploration and retrieval of
legal documents
Silvana Castano, Mattia Falduti, Alfio Ferrara, Stefano Montanelli

∗

Università degli Studi di Milano, Department of Computer Science - Via Celoria, 18 - 20133 Milano, Italy

article

info

Article history:
Received 30 October 2020
Received in revised form 13 April 2021
Accepted 10 June 2021
Available online 7 July 2021
Recommended by Andrea Tagarelli
Keywords:
Legal knowledge model
Legal knowledge extraction
Legal document retrieval and exploration

a b s t r a c t
Automated legal knowledge extraction systems are strongly demanded, to support annotation of legal
documents as well as knowledge extraction from them, to provide useful and relevant suggestions to
legal actors (e.g., judges, lawyers) for managing incoming new cases.
In this paper, we propose CRIKE (CRIme Knowledge Extraction), a knowledge-based framework
conceived to support legal knowledge extraction from a collection of legal documents, based on a
reference legal ontology called LATO (Legal Abstract Term Ontology). We first introduce LATO-KM, the
knowledge model of LATO where legal knowledge featuring documents in the collection is properly
formalized as conceptual knowledge, in form of legal concepts and relationships, and terminological
knowledge, in form of term-sets associated with legal concepts. Then, we present the bootstrapping
cycle of CRIKE that aims to progressively enrich the terminological knowledge layer of LATO by
extracting new terms from legal documents to be used for enriching the term-set associated with
a corresponding legal concept. Finally, to evaluate the results obtained through CRIKE, we discuss
experimental results on a real dataset of 180,000 court decisions of the State of Illinois taken from the
Caselaw Access Project (CAP).
© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
In the era of big data, research activity on data science focuses on the collection, processing, and interpretation of large
datasets to produce knowledge for decision-making processes in
different application domains and contexts. In the legal domain,
thousands of legal documents are constantly produced by institutional bodies, such as Parliaments and Courts, both law and
court decisions documents. Law documents are stated using a
general and abstract terminology, in that law provides statements
governing human conduct that must be applicable to several
cases and circumstances. On the opposite, court decision documents are written using specific and concrete terminology, in
that they provide a contextualized, case-oriented interpretation
of law deriving from the way judges/lawyers decide to apply
the law statements to the specific circumstances/situation of the
case at hand. Both law and case-law, that is, the collection of
court decisions, constitute prominent sources to be considered
for knowledge extraction, in that they provide the general legal framework (law) and the specific interpretations (case-law)
adopted for already analyzed and processed cases. When a new
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: silvana.castano@unimi.it (S. Castano),
mattia.falduti@unimi.it (M. Falduti), alfio.ferrara@unimi.it (A. Ferrara),
stefano.montanelli@unimi.it (S. Montanelli).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.is.2021.101842
0306-4379/© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

case is submitted for judgment, according to a knowledge-based
process, a new legal document like a court decision can be produced for the case at hand by retrieving relevant legal knowledge,
that is, knowledge deriving from (i) the law, for understanding
the general rules that are relevant/prominent for the current
case [1,2], and (ii) the case-law, for detecting possible relevant
interpretations of law terminology in history of similar case-law
documentation [3,4]. In this context, automated legal knowledge
extraction systems are strongly demanded, to support annotation of legal documents as well as knowledge extraction from
them, to provide useful and relevant suggestions to legal actors (e.g., judges, lawyers) for managing incoming new cases [5].
However, the effectiveness of above solutions depends on the capability of capturing the features and nature of terminology used
in legal documents and to the capability of developing knowledge
models where such features are properly formalized and implemented as ontology tools. Furthermore, automated terminological
extraction techniques are required in order to cope with growing volume, complexity, and articulation of legal documents, to
overcome the limitations of manually performed term-extraction
tasks, representing a critical activity also in supervised learning
approaches to build the training set [6].
In this paper, we address these issues and we propose CRIKE
(CRIme Knowledge Extraction), a knowledge-based framework
conceived to support legal knowledge extraction from a collection of legal documents, based on a reference legal ontology

S. Castano, M. Falduti, A. Ferrara et al.

Information Systems 106 (2022) 101842

the large set of rules, written by the legislative powers, to govern
human conduct. As a matter of fact, real-life is too complex and
unpredictable to be completely foreseen in legal structures with
the consequence that it is impossible to rule on every single possible scenario. In order for the law to be applicable to unpredictable
new cases and uncountable future events, the solution for legislators has been to include an abstract terminology in the legal
jargon, referred to using multiple expressions in the literature,
such as the indeterminacy in legal rules [7], legal indeterminacy
of law [8] or the vague expressions of legal texts [9]. Consider,
for example, the following excerpt of the Italian law about drugs
and related drug offenses [10]. ‘‘the Consolidated Law, adopted by
Presidential Decree No 309 on 9 October 1990 and subsequently
amended, provides the legal framework for trade, treatment and
prevention, and prohibition and punishment of illegal activities in
the field of drugs and psychoactive substances. Drug use in itself is
not mentioned as an offense. [. . . ] The threshold between personal
possession and trafficking is determined by the circumstances of the
specific case (e.g., the act, possession of tools for packaging, different
types of drug possessed, number of doses in excess of average daily
use, means of organization). The penalty for supply-related offenses,
such as production, sale, transport, distribution or acquisition, depends on the type of drug. However, when the offenses are considered
minor because of the means, modalities or circumstances, the terms
of imprisonment are lower. Evaluating whether or not the offense is
minor should take into account a set of ‘‘ancillary’’ elements such as
the mode of action, possible criminal motives, quality and quantity
of drug possessed, the character of the offender, conduct during or
subsequent to the offense, and the family and social conditions of the
offender’’. The notion of minor offense is an example of abstract
terminology in the above law quotation, that is, it expresses
open-textured concept not rigorously defined in the law, which
finds a concrete interpretation only with a precise definition of
circumstances and related threshold quantities of the specific
case at hand. In a similar way, drug trafficking is another example of open-textured concept in that the final decision/verdict
for a given case is based on a specific interpretation of what
‘‘drug trafficking’’ is, by considering the specific circumstances
and quantities featuring the case. The capability of capturing and
representing in a legal ontology not only conventional concepts
but also open-textured, abstract concepts is essential to provide a
comprehensive and suitable legal knowledge representation. The
following efforts need to be taken into account:

called LATO (Legal Abstract Term Ontology). We first introduce
LATO-KM, the knowledge model of LATO where legal knowledge
featuring documents in the collection is properly formalized as
conceptual knowledge, in form of legal concepts and relationships, and terminological knowledge, in form of term-sets associated with legal concepts. Then, we present the bootstrapping
cycle of CRIKE that aims to progressively enrich the terminological knowledge layer of LATO by extracting new terms from legal
documents to be used for enriching the term-set associated with
a corresponding legal concept. In a bootstrapping cycle of CRIKE
(i) term extraction is based on multi-label annotation techniques
where the collection of annotated documents is built by relying
on the conceptual knowledge actually available in LATO without
the need of manual annotation and (ii) term enrichment relies on
information retrieval techniques for discovering new terms with
which to populate the terminological layer (i.e., term-sets) of legal concepts to be exploited for subsequent exploration/retrieval
operations, to get the most pertinent legal documents from the
collection.
To evaluate the results obtained through CRIKE, we discuss experimental results on a real dataset of 180,000 court decisions of
the State of Illinois taken from the Caselaw Access Project (CAP).
The experimentation has a twofold objective: on one side, terminology assessment, with the aim to measure the effectiveness of
the terms discovered by CRIKE after the first bootstrapping cycle;
on the other side, bootstrapping assessment, with the aim to evaluate the improvement of CRIKE retrieval after a few bootstrapping
cycles.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the motivating scenario as well as an overview of the CRIKE framework.
Section 3 presents the LATO Knowledge Model and related ontology formalization. The CRIKE bootstrapping techniques for term
extraction and enrichment are described in Section 4. In Section 5,
we discuss the CRIKE modalities for supporting exploration and
retrieval of legal documents. In Section 6, we illustrate experimental results on a real collection of court decision documents.
Related work is presented in Section 7. Concluding remarks are
finally provided in Section 8.
2. Motivating scenario and overview of CRIKE
Consider a legal actor/user interested in drug-related offenses.
A certain number of document collections are online with the
aim at enabling exploration and retrieval of legal documents like
court/case-law decisions, such as for example https://eur-lex.eu
ropa.eu/collection/eu-law/eu-case-law.html, https://caselaw.findl
aw.com/, and https://case.law to mention a few. Access modalities and search options can vary from one collection to another,
depending on the kind of document annotation enforced and on
the degree of heterogeneity of collection documents. Mostly, the
search options are characterized by basic keyword-match techniques over indexed documents. In addition to this, conventional
techniques for text processing are usually applied to documents,
such as tokenization, term normalization, and stemming, to improve the retrieval effectiveness. In such a framework, a core
issue is about the capability to enforce document retrieval according to a concept-based modality, rather than to a keyword-based
one. For instance, a legal user can express the concept query drug,
meaning that she/he is interested in obtaining all the documents
where a drug keyword occurs, such as for example cocaine, crack,
and narcotic. The use of semantic-web technologies contributes
to address this issue, in that an ontology can be defined to model
the domain knowledge about drug trafficking crimes. This way,
documents can be annotated through the ontology terminology
and retrieval can be enforced accordingly.
Providing an ontology for the legal domain requires the capability to capture all the peculiarities of law terminology. Law is

• Legal expert effort. The specification of an ontology that
is adequate to satisfy the possible information needs of
legal users is challenging by definition. A strong manual
effort is required to provide an effective ontological representation of legal concepts featuring collection documents
(e.g., court decisions). This is even more complex when we
have to deal with open-textured concepts that are abstract
and not-rigorously defined in the law (e.g., the concept
drug trafficking). Concretely supporting the legal expert in
concept specification becomes crucial for the success of the
retrieval functionalities.
• Ontology enrichment effort. The ontology vocabulary needs to
be periodically updated to capture the changes in the law as
long as new interpretations emerge. This can be triggered by
the insertion of new documents in the collection to consider
as well as by the recognition of a novel terminology to
associate with a certain concept. For instance, the concept
drug initially defined in the ontology can be extended to
include new substances that become considered as drug in
recent court decisions, like for example meth and ecstasy. As
a consequence, two actions are required: (i) the legal expert
needs to be involved in the manual revision of the ontology
2

S. Castano, M. Falduti, A. Ferrara et al.

Information Systems 106 (2022) 101842

specification, and (ii) the document annotation has to be
re-executed according to the revised ontology. Limiting the
manual effort of the legal expert and automating the document annotation process as much as possible are priorities
addressed in CRIKE.

these requirements, we define LATO-KM, a three-layer knowledge
model based on the following entities and relationships (see
Fig. 2):

• Legal concept: a legal concept Ci denotes a general
rule/fact/element defined in the law (e.g., Act, Illinois Controlled Substances Act) and it is labeled with the terminology
that appears in law texts. Legal concepts constitute the
intermediate layer of LATO-KM.
• Term-set: a term-set Ti represents the concrete interpretation of a legal concept Ci in form of a set of terms occurrences that can be found in the text of legal documents. A
term in a term-set is a string of characters expressed in the
language of the document collection; also composite nouns
are considered as terms in LATO term-sets (e.g. both Illinois
Contr. Sub. Act and the acronym ICSA are terms). Term-sets
constitute the bottom layer of LATO-KM.
• Functional category: a functional category represents a
kind/role of legal concepts in the law formulation, namely
descriptive, statutory, modifier, and abstract, respectively.
A statutory category describes a legal concept featuring
something that is directly or indirectly defined in the law
specification itself (e.g., Act). A descriptive category describes a legal concept featuring actions, human activities,
and any real-life object in the law specification (e.g., Drug,
Evidence). A modifier category describes a legal concept
featuring quantitative/qualitative aspects of things/actions
in the law specification (e.g., Weight). An abstract category
describes a legal concept featuring an open-textured topic
that requires a concrete application for being really defined
(e.g., Drug Trafficking) [11]. Functional categories constitute
the top layer of LATO-KM.

2.1. The CRIKE framework
The CRIKE framework enforces knowledge-centered exploration and retrieval of legal documents by relying on a reference
legal ontology called LATO (see Fig. 1). The idea of CRIKE is to deal
with the dynamism and variability of the terminology associated
with legal documents, by employing (i) extraction techniques,
to detect concept applications/interpretations throughout documents based on the ontology knowledge modeled in LATO, and
(ii) enrichment techniques, to progressively add terminological
knowledge to the LATO ontology to be exploited for subsequent
exploration/retrieval stages.
CRIKE relies on an initial version of the LATO ontology where a
legal expert manually defines a core starting set of legal concepts
of interest with an associated (small) set of terms (i.e., termset). CRIKE is defined as a cyclic and incremental approach. Cycle
after cycle, the combined execution of term extraction and term
enrichment tasks produces a new enriched version of the LATO
ontology. The goal of this new ontology version is twofold:

• Legal document exploration and retrieval. The knowledge
currently-available in the LATO ontology, both concepts and
related terminology, is exploited to support legal users in effectively exploring and retrieving the appropriate legal documents according to specific queries over the legal concepts.
In particular, in addition to a keyword-based query modality,
CRIKE also provides concept-driven and topic-driven query
modalities where the legal user can specify a concept/topic
of interest (e.g., drug, drug trafficking) and all documents
related to the specified target are retrieved as a result,
according to the LATO ontology relationships. For instance,
given a query on the concept drug, documents containing
keywords belonging to the term-set of this concept, such
as cocaine and other narcotic substances, are returned as a
result.
• Incremental ontology enrichment. The LATO ontology is exploited to activate the execution of a new bootstrapping
cycle to further enrich the terminological layer of the LATO
concepts. The execution of a new cycle is decided by the
legal expert on the basis of the relevance of new terminology extracted and inserted in the current cycle. For example,
the expert can decide to stop running CRIKE when poorly
relevant new terms are extracted.

According to LATO-KM, the concrete meaning of legal concepts
is fully defined by referring to the specific terminology (i.e., termset) that appears in real documents. Moreover, legal concepts are
classified with respect to the role they play in the law formulation
using functional categories. To formalize, a legal concept Ci is
defined as 3-uple of the form:
Ci = ⟨n(Ci ), C(Ci ), Ti∗ ⟩
where:

• n(Ci ) is the label of the legal concept;
• C(Ci ) ∈ {SC , DC , MC , AC } is the functional category of Ci ,
either statutory (SC ), descriptive (DC ), modifier (MC ), or
abstract (AC ).
• Ti∗ = {t1 , . . . , tn } is the term-set of the concept Ci , namely
the terms concretely used in the considered collection of
legal documents to refer to Ci . The asterisk symbol (‘‘*’’)
denotes optionality, in that we may have some legal concepts not (yet) associated with a corresponding term-set. In
particular, abstract concepts, for their abstract nature, are
not directly associated with a specific term-set, but rather
they are indirectly featured by the term-sets associated with
the legal concepts to which the abstract concept is related.

Running example. As a reference running example throughout the paper, we consider the CAP dataset of court decision documents belonging to the Caselaw Access Project (https://case.law/
bulk/download). The CAP provides public access to U.S. law digitized from the collection of the Harvard Law Library. In particular,
we focus on drug-related offenses with specific interest in the
Illinois Criminal Law, namely the Illinois Controlled Substances
Act (ICSA).

Intra- and inter-layer relationships are defined in LATO-KM
to capture the semantic relationships that hold between pairs of
entities. The following intra-layer binary relationships are defined
in LATO-KM:

3. The LATO legal knowledge model
The legal knowledge model of LATO captures and formalizes
the features and nature of terminology used in legal documents,
both law and case-law documents. A design challenge is to find
a suitable way of modeling the different nature of concepts and
terms appearing in law and case-law documents as well as their
meaning and roles [11]. To model legal knowledge and capture

• Term-to-Term: it is a binary relationship between a pair of
terms t and t ′ in a term-set Ti at the bottom layer, and it
describes a morphological relationship between terms like
for example:
– paradigm (e.g. to deal - dealt - dealt)
3

S. Castano, M. Falduti, A. Ferrara et al.

Information Systems 106 (2022) 101842

Fig. 1. The CRIKE framework for exploration and retrieval of legal documents.

Fig. 2. Overview of LATO-KM with an example of legal knowledge modeling about drug crimes.

– conjugation – for verb (e.g. dealt - deals - dealing)
– declension – for nouns (e.g. drug - drugs - drug’s)
– abbreviation (e.g. Illinois Contr. Sub. Act - ICSA)
– string similarity (e.g. Substances Act - substances act Subs. Act).

references (e.g., Act), descriptive concepts denoting objective judgment elements (e.g., Drug), and modifier concepts
denoting quantitative evaluation (e.g., Weight).
The following inter-layer binary relationships are defined in
LATO-KM:

• Concept-to-Concept: it is a binary relationship between two
• Term-to-Concept: it is a binary relationship between a term
t ∈ Ti and a legal concept Ci denoting that Ci can be

legal concepts Ci and Cj at the intermediate layer, capturing
semantic relationships holding between them in the law
formulation. In particular, we introduce the kind-of relationship between two concepts to represent a generalization/specialization relationship between them. For instance,
Weight kind-of Unit of Measure is an example of kind-of
relationship. Moreover, we introduce the related relationship between two concepts to represent a generic positive
relationship between them. The related relationship is used
to model abstract concepts. In particular, given a considered abstract concept Ci (e.g., Drug Trafficking), related is
used to connect Ci to those ancillary concepts Cj of LATO
representing the concepts needed for the concrete interpretation of Ci , namely statutory concepts, providing legislative

‘‘lexicalized’’ by t in a document text. A Term-to-Concept
relationship is defined through the instance-of relationship
for each term t ∈ Ti and the corresponding legal concept
Ci at the intermediate layer of LATO-KM. For example, ICSA
instance-of Illinois Controlled Substances Act is defined to
express that the term ICSA belongs to the term-set of the
concept Illinois Controlled Substances Act.
• Concept-to-Category: it is a binary relationship between a
legal concept Ci and a functional category C (Ci ) expressing
the role/nature of the concept in the law formulation. A
Concept-to-Category relationship is defined through the is-a
relationship. Act is-a Statutory is defined to express that the
notion of Act is directly defined in the law.
4

S. Castano, M. Falduti, A. Ferrara et al.

Information Systems 106 (2022) 101842

by the corresponding term-set TiK resulting from the K th term
extraction/enrichment cycle.
Term extraction and term enrichment techniques of CRIKE are
described in the following.

We call conceptual knowledge the set of legal concepts C that
is formally represented in the LATO ontology, where concepts
are interlinked by semantic relations and associated with corresponding terminological knowledge. We call terminological knowledge the term-sets concretely used in a considered collection of
legal documents to refer to legal concepts.

4.1. Term extraction

The LATO ontology implementation The LATO ontology is implemented by using SKOS (Simple Knowledge Organization System) [12]. The legal concepts of the intermediate layer are implemented as SKOS concepts in LATO. Concept-to-Concept relationships are specified through a corresponding SKOS relation.
In particular, the kind-of relationship of LATO-KM is specified
through the skos:broader relation. For instance, a skos:broader
relation is defined between the concept Weight and the concept
Unit of Measure. The Related relationship of LATO-KM is specified through the skos:related relation. The related relationship is
used to model abstract concepts. In particular, given an abstract
concept Ci (e.g., Drug Trafficking), related is used to connect Ci
to those ancillary concepts of LATO representing the concepts
needed for the concrete interpretation of Ci , namely statutory
concepts, providing legislative references (e.g., Act), descriptive
concepts denoting objective judgment elements (e.g., Drug), and
modifier concepts denoting quantitative evaluation (e.g., Weight).
The term-sets of the bottom layer are implemented using
labels of SKOS concepts. In particular, for each SKOS concept (i)
a skos:prefLabel is defined to implement the instance-of relationship, and (ii) a number of skos:altLabel are defined to implement
the various Term-to-Term relationships denoting possible alternative terms for the considered SKOS concept. For instance, a
skos:prefLabel relation is defined between the Drug LATO concept
and the Drug term, while a skos:altLabel relation is defined between the Drug term and the Narcotics term. Finally, functional
categories of the top layer are implemented as SKOS concepts,
too. Concept-to-Category is-a relationships are expressed through
the skos:broader relation. For instance, a skos:broader relation
is defined between the Drug LATO concept and the Descriptive
category concept.

The goal of term extraction is to extract new terminology from
the collection of crike documents that can be used to enrich the
term-set of the LATO concepts. Term extraction is articulated in
two steps, namely document annotation and term selection.
Document annotation. Document annotation has the goal to determine the set of documents Di that can be tagged with a
legal concept Ci according to the document content. This is done
according to the procedure described in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: Document annotation
Result: Collection of annotated documents;
compute Tdj term-based representation of each document
dj ∈ D ;
define dj as the TfIdf vector representation of Tdj ;
foreach Ci ∈ C do
define Ti as the term-set closure of Ci ;
define ci as the TfIdf vector representation of Ti ;
σ (Ci , dj ) = cosine(ci , dj );
if σ (Ci , dj ) ≥ th then
insert dj in Di ;
end
end
Document annotation is based on the term-sets of the LATO
concepts and on the term-based representations Tdj of each document dj ∈ D. In particular, for a concept Ci , we consider the
term-set Ti = {tk : ∃(tk , instance − of, Ci )} defined as the closure
of the LATO term-set relations. For a document dj , the term-based
representation Tdj is built by applying conventional text analysis
techniques (i.e., tokenization, stop-word removal, normalization).
As a result, the set Tdj includes text tokens, each one representing
an atomic term. Moreover, the set Tdj includes noun chunks, each
one representing a text portion that qualifies a noun. A noun
chunk provides a singleton representation of a composite noun
description (e.g., new york city, big apple, most populous city)
that can be obtained by parsing the structure of the syntactic
dependencies in the document content and by associating with a
noun the document terms that have a direct dependence with the
noun in the syntactic dependency tree. The aim of noun chunks
is to overcome the limitations of basic tokenization techniques,
for example when dealing with compound terms (e.g., new york
city).
In order to decide whether a document dj can be annotated
with a concept Ci , we evaluate the relevance of the term-based
representation Tdj with respect to the term-set Ti . To this end,
for each dj ∈ D, the set Tdj is transformed in a vector dj over
the tokens space based on Tf–Idf. A vector representation ci
based on Tf–Idf is also generated for each term-set Ti . Finally,
we calculate the relevance score σ (Ci , dj ) of a concept Ci for a
document dj as the cosine similarity between the corresponding
vector representations, namely:

Example. As an example of LATO ontology implementation, the
SKOS representation of the Drug concept is provided in the following:

lato:Descriptive rdf:type skos:Concept.
lato:DrugTrafficking rdf:type skos:Concept.
lato:Drug rdf:type skos:Concept;
skos:broader lato:Descriptive;
skos:related lato:DrugTrafficking;
skos:prefLabel "drug"@en;
skos:altLabel "narcotics"@en.
4. The CRIKE bootstrapping techniques
CRIKE is based on the iterative execution of a bootstrapping
cycle organized in the sequence of steps shown in Fig. 3. The
collection of legal documents D is transformed through segmentation into a collection of crike documents D. A crike document
represents a document unit for text processing purposes and it
is usually defined as a sub-part of a legal document within the
collection (e.g., a section, a paragraph, a sentence/phrase).
The (K + 1)th execution of the bootstrapping cycle is activated
on (i) the collection of crike documents D = {d1 , . . . , dn },1 and
(ii) the version of the LATO ontology after the K th bootstrapping
cycle, namely the set of legal concepts Ci ∈ C each one featured

σ (Ci , dj ) = cosine(ci , dj )
The set Di of documents annotated with the concept Ci is
defined as follows:

1 For the sake of readability, in the remaining of the paper, we use the term
‘‘document’’ to denote a ‘‘crike document’’.

Di = dj : σ (Ci , dj ) ≥ th ,

{

5

}

S. Castano, M. Falduti, A. Ferrara et al.

Information Systems 106 (2022) 101842

Fig. 3. The CRIKE bootstrapping cycle.

where th is a threshold used to set the minimum value of cosine
similarity between the vectors ci and dj that is required to annotate the document dj with the concept Ci . According to the relevance scores, a document can be annotated with more than one
concept, thus resulting in a multi-label annotation scheme. An
example is reported in Table 1, where we present text fragments
of documents with the corresponding concepts, by highlighting in
bold the terms that mostly contribute to determine the similarity
between the fragment and the concepts.

4.2. Term enrichment
The term enrichment phase of the K + 1th bootstrapping cycle
involves a legal expert and has the goal to define the term-set
TiK +1 of a concept Ci by relying on the term-set TiK generated
in the K th bootstrapping cycle according to the candidate terms
Tik previously extracted. This phase is articulated in two steps,
namely legal expert support and legal expert selection.
Legal expert support. The aim of this step is to support a legal
expert in manually determining the subset of terms Ri ⊆ Tik to
exploit for enrichment of the term-set Ti . As a first activity, for
each concept Ci , we exploit the LATO terminological relations in
order to submit to the expert the subset of Tik containing only the
terms that are not already contained in a term-set of the LATO
ontology, that are {t : t ∈ Tik ∧ ∄(t , instance − of, Ci )}. Moreover,
the function F (t , Ci ) → N+ is defined to count the number of
times a term t has been extracted and selected as a relevant term
for a concept Ci . In particular, F (t , Ci ) = 1 for all the terms that
belong to Ri \ TiK , namely the terms that have been recognized as
relevant for Ci in the K + 1 cycle for the first time. The value of
F (t , Ci ) is increased by 1 for the remaining terms of Ri (i.e., Ri ∩TiK ),
meaning that they were already recognized as relevant for Ci in
previous bootstrapping cycles.

Term selection. For each concept Ci , the goal of term selection
is to find the candidate terms Tik to consider for enrichment of
the corresponding term-set Ti . This is done by considering the
most relevant terms featuring the documents Di annotated with
the concept Ci . To this end, we calculate the relevance of terms
with respect to concepts by relying on Tf–Idf. As a preliminary
step, for each concept Ci , we create a pseudo-document Di by
concatenating all the documents that are annotated with Ci as
follows:
Di = d1 ∥d2 ∥ · · · ∥ dm ∀dj ∈ Di

where d1 ∥ d2 denotes the document obtained by concatenating the text of d1 and the text of d2 . The set A of all the
pseudo-documents Di associated with the ontology concepts is
called annotated collection. A term-based representation TDi is
built for each pseudo-document Di by applying the text analysis
techniques used for document annotation, including noun chunk
tokenization. An example of pseudo-document and corresponding term-based representation is shown in Table 2 for the concept
Drug.
The relevance of a term t for a concept Ci is defined as ρ (t , Ci )
and it is calculated as the Tf–Idf value of t in the set TDi associated
with the pseudo-document Di . In particular, the term frequency
Tf (t , TDi ) is the number of occurrences of t in TDi , normalized by
the length of TDi , and the inverse document frequency Idf (t) is
the inverse of the number of pseudo-documents in the annotated
collection A where the term t occurs, normalized by the size of A.

ρ (t , Ci ) = tf − idf (t , Di ) = ∑

(
×

Legal expert selection. In the legal expert selection step, we submit to the expert a list of candidate terms for each concept Ci .
This list is composed by the new terms discovered in the K + 1
bootstrapping cycle ranked in descending order of their relevance
score ρ (t , Ci ) with respect to Ci . By exploiting the relevance scores
and their knowledge of the domain, the legal expert reviews
the new terms discovered in the K + 1 cycle (i.e., those having
F (t , Ci ) = 1) and select the terms that are pertinent to Ci . Those
terms are added to the term-set Ti by associating them to Ci
through a term-to-concept relation instance-of. An example of the
term enrichment step for the term set of concept Drug is shown
in Fig. 4. As a result, the set TiK +1 is defined as follows:

Tf (t , TDi )
t ′ ∈TDi Tf (t

′, T

Di )

TiK +1 ≡ TiK ∪ Ri .

)

log

|A|
+1
1+ | {TDj : t ∈ TDj } |

5. Legal document exploration and retrieval

The terms are then ranked according to the relevance score
ρ (t , Ci ). The set Tik is defined as a result to denote the top-k candidate terms of a concept Ci for enrichment of the corresponding
term-set Ti . An example of terms that are selected for the concept
Drug after the first bootstrapping cycle is shown in Table 3.

In the following, we describe the main functionalities provided
by the CRIKE for exploration and retrieval of pertinent legal
documents within a given collection D.
6

S. Castano, M. Falduti, A. Ferrara et al.

Information Systems 106 (2022) 101842

Table 1
Example of the CRIKE multi-label document annotation.
Document dj

Concept ci

d1 : ‘‘The crack [...] plastic bag [...] 20 gr.’’

Drug, Evidence, Unit of Measure

d2 : ‘‘cocaine was found [...] 720 ILCS 570 and
[...] seizure [...] controlled’’

Drug, Act

d3 : ‘‘The apartment [...] paraphernalia [...] ’’

Evidence

d4 : ‘‘Inside the car [...] drug sale [...] arrest
during [...] ’’

Drug Trafficking Verb, Criminal Procedure

d5 : ‘‘The day before [...] grams [...] inspected’’

Unit of Measure

d6 : ‘‘[...] Illinois Controlled Substances Act [...]
orders [...] tested positive [...] cocaine’’

Drug, Illinois Controlled Substances Act

Table 2
Example of pseudo-document and corresponding term-based representation.
Pseudo-Document DDrug

Term-based representation TDDrug

The crack [...] plastic bag [...] 20 gr. cocaine
was found [...] 720 ILCS 570 and [...] seizure
[...] controlled Illinois Controlled Substances
Act [...] orders [...] tested positive [...] cocaine

[crack, plastic bag, 20 gr. cocaine, found, 720
ilcs 570, seizure, controlled, illinois, controlled,
substances act, orders, tested, positive, cocaine]

Table 3
Example of terms selected for the concept Drug after the first bootstrapping cycle.
Concept Drug
Before 1st bootstrapping cycle

After 1st bootstrapping cycle

drug, drugs, narcotic, narcotics, substance

unprescribed, addicts, marihuana, thc, synthetic
drugs, toxic, sativa, cake, lsd, [...]

Fig. 4. Example of term-set enrichment for the LATO concept Drug.

5.1. Legal document exploration

• Concept-driven exploration. We envisage two modalities of
concept-driven exploration focusing on the different layers of the knowledge model of LATO. The first modality is
conceived to explore concepts by functional categories. The
legal user specifies a functional category fc (i.e., statutory,
descriptive, modifier, abstract) and the set of LATO concepts
Ci belonging to that category are returned according to the
following SELECT operator:

The goal is to explore the LATO ontology knowledge, both
conceptual and terminological, for subsequent legal document
retrieval. The following exploration modalities are defined.

• Keyword-driven exploration. Given a keyword k, the terminological and conceptual knowledge featuring k in LATO
is returned as a result, according to the following SELECT
operator:

SELECT Ci
WHERE ∃(Ci , is − a, fc)

SELECT Ci , Ti , F (k, Ci )
WHERE ∃(k, instance − of, Ci )

The second modality is conceived to explore legal concepts
of LATO. The legal user specifies a concept of interest Ci and
the LATO concepts Cj having a relationship with Ci (i.e., kindof or related relationships), each one with its corresponding
term-set Tj , are returned according to the following SELECT
operator:

In particular, the result is composed by the concept(s) Ci
with the corresponding term-set(s) Ti to which k belongs
and by the number of legal documents that have been
annotated with Ci through k (i.e., F (k, Ci )).
7

S. Castano, M. Falduti, A. Ferrara et al.

Information Systems 106 (2022) 101842

SELECT Cj , Tj
WHERE (Cj ≡ Ci ) OR
(∃(Cj , kind − of, Ci )) OR
(∃(Cj , related, Ci ))

The topic-driven modality is recommended to retrieve legal
documents based on abstract concepts of the LATO ontology.
It is important to note that, in this modality, any document
that is somehow concerned with the ac is returned, namely
any document annotated with any concept related to ac in
the LATO ontology. In other words, documents retrieved for
drug trafficking are those documents that are annotated with
act, evidence, drug, and unit of measure. We want to stress
that this retrieval modality represents a peculiar feature of
CRIKE not supported in conventional keyword-based search
systems.

By exploiting results obtained according to keyword-driven
and concept-drive exploration modalities, the legal user receives
an insight about conceptual and terminological knowledge used
for document annotation as well a support for formulation of
retrieval queries according the modalities described in the following.
5.2. Legal document retrieval

5.3. CRIKE applicability

The goal is to enforce legal document retrieval over the given
collection according to different knowledge-based queries depending on the specific information need of the legal user. The
following retrieval modalities are defined.

We envisage three main practical use cases for applicability of
CRIKE in legal-domain applications and contexts.

• Legal text annotation. CRIKE could serve as a semiautomated, multi-label annotator, to annotate legal documents according to a set of concepts, at different levels
of granularity. CRIKE would reduce the human-expert effort required in such a task, by relying on the proposed
extraction and enrichment techniques.
• Professional knowledge expansion. CRIKE could be used as
a legal-professional assistant tool, by subjects involved in
the trial, namely lawyers, investigators, law enforcement
authorities, public prosecutors, and judges, to extend their
legal knowledge. Usually, these professionals need to acquire/expand their legal knowledge without reading legal
documents entirely. Using CRIKE, they can explore relevant
conceptual/terminological knowledge and use this knowledge to retrieve only relevant documents for subsequent
exploration of their contents.
• Criminal evidence processing. CRIKE could be useful as a
support for criminal text analytics, in particular in all the
cases where law enforcement agencies need to process a
large dataset of investigation reports, phone-tapping and
emails, social network interactions and messages, or any
sort of textual data forensics. This task is usually performed
by searching a set of given keywords, and CRIKE could
be useful in discovering new and potentially relevant terminology, initially unknown by the investigators, such as
specific cross-collection terminology and peculiar idiomatic
language.

• Keyword-driven retrieval, the information need of the legal
user is expressed as a keyword of interest k, like for example
cocaine. The set of legal documents featured by k is returned
as a result according to the following RETRIEVE operator:
RETRIEVE Di
WHERE ∃(k, instance − of, Ci )

It is important to note that CRIKE returns not only documents directly annotated with k (like conventional keywordbased search modalities of online systems) but also documents annotated with any other term included in the same
term-set of k (i.e., documents annotated by terms associated
with concept Ci ). This way, the user discovers that not only
cocaine documents are returned as expected, but also crack
and narcotic documents are provided in that they are drugrelated documents and, as such, potentially relevant for the
target information need.
• Concept-driven retrieval, the information need of the legal
user is expressed in form of a concept name n(C), like for
example ICSA. The set of legal documents annotated by C
is returned as a result according to the following RETRIEVE
operator:
RETRIEVE Di
WHERE (n(Ci ) = n(C)) AND Ci ∈ C

The concept-driven modality is recommended to retrieve legal documents based on statutory and descriptive concepts
of the LATO ontology, since concepts in these categories describe clear and well-defined law notions (e.g., drug, criminal
procedure, evidence). Queries based on modifier concepts
are also possible in this modality, even if concepts of this
category are general and ancillary to other concepts. This
means that queries on modifier concepts are less intuitive,
and maybe less meaningful than queries on statutory and
descriptive concepts.
• Topic-driven retrieval, the information need of the legal user
is expressed an open-textured topic corresponding to an
abstract concept n(ac) in the LATO ontology, like for example
drug trafficking. The set of legal documents featured by n(ac)
is returned as a result according to the following RETRIEVE
operator:

6. Experimental results
The experimentation has two objectives: (i) terminology assessment, in which we aim at measuring the effectiveness of
the terms discovered by CRIKE after one bootstrapping cycle;
(ii) bootstrapping assessment, in which we aim at evaluating the
improvement of CRIKE retrieval after a few bootstrapping cycles.
The evaluation is performed on the CAP dataset used as running example throughout the paper. The dataset has been selected due to its data quality and data completeness. In particular,
we considered about 100,000 court decisions of the State of
Illinois and we built a collection of crike documents each one
corresponding to a single phrase/sentence of the selected court
decisions. The case study exploited in the evaluation takes into
account the LATO abstract concept Drug Trafficking and its related
concepts, namely Drug, Drug Trafficking Verb, Evidence, Unit of
Measure, and Criminal Procedure plus the concept Illinois Controlled Substances Act which denotes the Illinois legislation about
drug trafficking.

RETRIEVE Di
WHERE (∃(ac, is − a, AC)) AND
[(∃(Ci , kind − of, ac)) OR
(∃(Ci , related, ac))]
8

S. Castano, M. Falduti, A. Ferrara et al.

Information Systems 106 (2022) 101842
Table 6
Example of legal expert evaluation for the concept Drug.

Table 4
Initial term-sets for the terminology assessment.
Concept

Initial term-set

Drug
Drug Trafficking Verb

drug, drugs, narcotic, narcotics, substance
drug import, drug sale, possession, drug
delivery, drug purchase
gram, grams, gr., pounds, weight
720 ILCS 570, illinois controlled substances act,
act, illinois court, ILCS
arrest, arrested, seizure, police, officer
evidence, plastic bag, plastic bags, witness,
testimony

Unit of Measure
Illinois Controlled
Substances Act
Criminal Procedure
Evidence

1

Table 5
Summary view of document annotation.
Concept

Term

ρ (t , CDrug )

Score

Set

traffickers

0.2306

0

Ti1 (0)

2

unprescribed

0.1931

2

Ti1 (2)

3

addicts

0,1709

2

Ti1 (2)

...

...

...

...

...

38

hershey

0.0596

2

Ti1 (2)

39

psilocyn

0.0596

2

Ti1 (2)

40

propagate

0.0569

−1

Ti1 (−1)

Table 7
Results of the terminology assessment.
Annotated
documents/phrases per
concept

Drug
Drug Trafficking Verb
Unit of Measure
Illinois Controlled Substances Act
Criminal Procedure
Evidence

25,138
40,000
7,241
40,000
40,000
33,417

Unique phrases

158,398

Concept

Ti1 (2)

Ti1 (1)

Ti1 (0)

Ti1 (−1)

c

u

Drug
Drug Trafficking Verb
Unit of Measure
Illinois Controlled Substances Act
Criminal Procedure
Evidence

18
7
10
10
24
15

0
8
3
6
4
3

7
20
16
14
10
16

15
5
11
10
2
6

0.45
0.38
0.32
0.4
0.7
0.45

0.45
0.18
0.25
0.25
0.6
0.38

0.45

0.35

Average

• Ti1 (1) denotes the set of terms extracted in the bootstrap-

ping cycle 1 that are pertinent for the legal concept Ci and
that are already included in the initial term-set Ti0
• Ti1 (0) denotes the set of terms extracted in the bootstrapping cycle 1 that are pertinent in the context of drug trafficking, but are not pertinent for the legal concept Ci
• Ti1 (−1) denotes the set of terms extracted in the bootstrapping cycle 1 that are not pertinent in the context of drug
trafficking

6.1. Terminology assessment
The goal of terminology assessment is to evaluate the capability of CRIKE to discover new and useful terms for enriching the
term-set of the legal concepts in LATO.
Methodology. The LATO ontology is initialized with a limited set
of terms for each concept of interest provided by a legal expert.
Then, we execute a complete bootstrapping cycle according to
the workflow described in Section 4. In the term enrichment step
of the workflow, instead of asking the legal expert to select the
terms for enriching the ontology, we ask the expert to associate
each term discovered by CRIKE with a score that describes the
term pertinence. The final goal of the evaluation is then to exploit
the legal expert scores in order to measure the correctness c and
the usefulness u of the terms discovery process. In particular, the
correctness is the number of discovered terms that are pertinent
for a given concept Ci , while the usefulness is the number of
correct terms that are new with respect to those already included
in the term-set associated with Ci before the execution of the
bootstrapping cycle.

An example of the outcome of the legal expert evaluation is
shown in Table 6.
For each concept Ci , we calculate the correctness c and the
usefulness u of the CRIKE term extraction over the outcome of
the legal expert evaluation. Correctness is the fraction of the
pertinent terms over the total number k of extracted terms and
usefulness is the fraction of the pertinent new terms over the
total number k of the extracted terms.
1
1
c = | Ti1 (2) ∪ Ti1 (1) |, u = | Ti1 (2) |
k
k
The results after the first CRIKE bootstrapping cycle are reported in Table 7.
In Fig. 5, the correctness and usefulness of extracted terms are
also evaluated by taking into account the ranking of each term
according to the relevance ρ (t , Ci ).

Setup and results. The initial term-set Ti0 associated with each
concept Ci has been manually defined by a legal expert by selecting 5 terms per concept as shown in Table 4.
Crike documents (i.e., phrases) are annotated with CRIKE, by
using a threshold th = 0.8. The threshold th has been set
experimentally, and it corresponds to the value that provided
better performances in the evaluation. Since the LATO concepts
are not uniformly represented in the evaluation dataset, we set a
maximum number of 40.000 documents/phrases that can annotated with a certain concept with the aim to avoid possible bias.
A summary of document annotation results is reported in Table 5.

Remarks. From the terminological assessment results, we observe that a significant number of pertinent terms is extracted
by CRIKE since the first bootstrapping cycle. We calculate the enrichment rate by comparing the size of Ti1 (2) ∪ Ti1 (1) with the size
of Ti0 (that is 5 terms in this experiment). In general, we observe
an increment from three to four times the size of the initial termset. The average size of the new term-sets is about the 35% of the
total number of extracted terms, while about the 45% of them are
correct terms. The results reported in Fig. 5 suggest also that the
top-ranked terms are often correct, which means that the legal
expert evaluation is required mainly for the low-ranked terms. By
observing the top-40 ranked terms, the legal expert highlights a
set of new terms for each concept that include verbs conjugations,
paradigms, declinations, abbreviations and very short acronyms,
unknown and unpredictable during the initial LATO modeling.
Moreover, we observe that CRIKE enables the extraction of peculiar kinds of terms such as idiomatic expressions, slang or

The first term extraction step produces a new term-set Ti1
(i.e., the terms extracted in bootstrapping cycle 1) composed by
the top-40 terms for the concept Ci according to the relevance
score ρ (t , Ci ). Terms in Ti1 are evaluated by a qualified legal expert
who associated each extracted term with a score in {2, 1, 0, −1}.

• Ti1 (2) denotes the set of terms extracted in the bootstrap-

ping cycle 1 that are pertinent for the legal concept Ci and
that are not already included in the initial term-set Ti0
9

S. Castano, M. Falduti, A. Ferrara et al.

Information Systems 106 (2022) 101842

Fig. 5. Values of correctness and usefulness at different ranking stages.
Table 8
Initial term-sets for bootstrapping assessment.

jargon, and terms that belong to domain contexts different from
the legal one, that are, for instance, the biological context, the
medical context and the social-service context. This terminology
is not strictly useful for the CRIKE purposes, but it is potentially
interesting because it enriches the domain knowledge about the
context in which drug trafficking crimes are perpetrated.
6.2. Bootstrapping assessment
In the bootstrapping assessment, we aim at evaluating the
retrieval functionalities of CRIKE over the CAP dataset after a few
number of bootstrapping cycles.

3851

4147

3686

4002

3586

drug
drug trafficking
grams
illinois legislation, illinois act
police, arrest
evidence

6.3. Final considerations

Setup and results. In Table 8, we show a set of drug-related
concepts each one equipped with an initial term-set.
The distribution of phrases per concept in the ground truth is
the following:
Drug
Unit of
Illinois
Criminal Evidence
Trafficking Measure Controlled Procedure
Verb
Substances
Act

Initial term-set T 0

Drug
Drug Trafficking Verb
Unit of Measure
Illinois Controlled Substances Act
Criminal Procedure
Evidence

We enforce a concept-driven query for each legal concept of
Table 8 and we evaluate precision and recall at the end of each
cycle. For the document annotation step of each bootstrapping
cycle, we set the threshold th = 0.8. In each cycle, the terminological enrichment step is executed by automatically selecting the
top-10 terms extracted by CRIKE from the documents annotated
with the current ontology vocabulary (the manual validation of
results by the legal expert is not executed in this experiment).
Precision and recall of CRIKE for each concept throughout the five
bootstrapping cycles are shown in Fig. 6.
A more detailed analysis of the results of CRIKE is given in
Table 9, where we report the confusion matrix for each concept
after each cycle.

Methodology. We evaluate the quality of a retrieval task in terms
of precision and recall. To this end, we involved a legal expert
in manually annotating a collection of 5000 sentences (i.e., crike
documents) extracted from the CAP dataset. The collection of
manually annotated phrases is the ground truth of our experiments. CRIKE is initialized with a basic version of the LATO
ontology where the concepts related to drug trafficking are associated with minimal term-sets. We execute a sequence of five
bootstrapping cycles and we perform a retrieval task according to
the concept-driven search modality (see Section 5). The aim is to
evaluate how the precision and recall of CRIKE change as a result
of the terminological enrichment enforced in each cycle.

Drug

Legal Concept

In Fig. 6 and Table 9, we observe that CRIKE achieves good
performances in both precision and recall after a few bootstrapping cycles. When the initial term-set contains few but effective
terms, as in the case of our experiment, the precision of CRIKE is
in general high for the first execution, but the recall is low due
to many documents that are relevant for the concept of interest
but do not contain the terms of the initial term-set. Without any
manual validation by the legal expert, term enrichment allows
to improve the retrieval performances by increasing the recall

3809
10

S. Castano, M. Falduti, A. Ferrara et al.

Information Systems 106 (2022) 101842

Fig. 6. Increment of precision and recall throughout five bootstrapping cycles.

without affecting the precision. The above considerations seem to
encourage a strategy where the enrichment of the terminological
knowledge of LATO is performed as fast as possible in terms of
number of bootstrapping cycles. In this sense, the recommendation for the legal expert is to enrich the term-sets of the LATO
concepts with as many as possible candidate terms at each cycle.
However, the results of our experiment on terminology assessment discourage the application of such a kind of strategy.
Indeed, we note that also the number of new terms acquired
in each cycle affects precision and recall of subsequent bootstrapping cycles. A strong enrichment of a term-set in a single
bootstrapping cycle can lead to a ‘‘partially convincing’’ terminology associated with the corresponding concept where also
poorly-relevant terms are included. As a result, the effectiveness
of document annotation in the subsequent bootstrapping cycles
can decrease. On the opposite, we argue that a strategy where
the enrichment of the terminological knowledge of LATO is progressively enforced through few, highly-relevant insertions per
term-set and bootstrapping cycle is to be encouraged to increase
the retrieval performances. In this sense, the recommendation
for the legal expert is to select for insertion only the candidate
terms that are characterized by high scores of relevance, thus
leaving the evaluation of the remaining terms to subsequent
bootstrapping cycles (if they are proposed again as candidate
terms for enrichment according to the results of next document
annotation steps).
In order to comply with these requirements, decision to activate a new bootstrapping cycle or not is left to the legal expert,
on the basis of the relevance of new terminology extracted and
selected for insertion at current cycle. For example, the expert
can decide to stop running CRIKE when poorly relevant new
terminology has been extracted and inserted with respect to the
previous cycle. We observe that CRIKE reaches its endpoint when
no new terminology is extracted in the current bootstrapping
cycle. In this case, a system-endpoint notification is automatically
sent to the expert. However, we expect that CRIKE will start to
collect some noise after some cycles, before reaching its endpoint.
On one side, this is mitigated by the fact that the legal expert has

the power to stop CRIKE before its natural endpoint. On the other
side, this human-control over CRIKE is to be considered positive
in the legal context where explainability and governability of
processing systems for legal documents is particularly relevant,
especially about the criminal matter.
7. Related work
Techniques and tools for automated extraction of legal knowledge are strongly demanded, to support annotation, analysis, and
understanding of legal documents [13]. Over the last 30 years, we
can note that Artificial Intelligence (AI) & Law represents a fruitful
field of research characterized by important breakthroughs that
involve formal reasoning, information retrieval, and conceptual
modeling applied to the legal domain [14–16]. Semantic Web
technologies are usually employed to create legal knowledge
bases, namely legal ontologies, derived from (i) the law, to formally represent the general rules that are relevant/prominent
for specific crime hypothesis in the form of legal concepts, and
(ii) the case-law, to associate legal concepts with relevant law
terminology extracted from court decisions [2,17,18]. However,
the heterogeneity of the legal domain has led to the construction
of content description models of miscellaneous ontological types.
As a result, ontologies have been employed to enforce knowledge
representation in a number of legal applications such as for example Commercial and Private Law, Data Protection, Intellectual
Property Law, Public and Criminal Law [19].
By analyzing the literature on legal knowledge modeling, a
distinction emerges between concepts that require a judicial decision and concepts that can be defined as generic or evaluative
since they are expressed as such in the law [20]. Such a distinction
brings the attention to the problem of formally modeling the
structure of the so-called abstract concepts, namely concepts
that are vague and/or open-textured [21]. As confirmed in [22],
difficulties with the specification of abstract concepts immediately raise during the ontology design phase. Issues about the
recognition of abstract concepts throughout legal documents are
also being appearing. The authors of [23] argue that an ontology
11

S. Castano, M. Falduti, A. Ferrara et al.

Information Systems 106 (2022) 101842

Table 9
Confusion matrix for each concept after five bootstrapping cycles.

cannot recognize all the occurrences of a legal concept since
the terminology to use for concept detection is never definitive.
Indeed, legal concepts are by necessity open-texture at a certain
degree, and they become more rigorously defined as long as
the time progresses and new interpretations are established. The
need to capture the appropriate concept interpretation to resolve ambiguities is confirmed in [24], where the authors pointed
out that the legal domain is constantly subject to evolving conceptualizations and neologisms. Despite their conservative style,

legal ‘‘sublanguages’’ show a remarkable flexibility and dynamism
in redefining legal terms and coining new ones. The authors
of [25] point out that legal knowledge is usually expressed with
domain-specific terminology and it is conveyed in textual form.
As confirmed by [26] the law is built upon practice and individual interpretations, which can be very different from case
to case. Moreover, further challenges complicate the automated
annotation of regulatory texts as reported in [27]. For example, U.S. federal regulations are highly structured and written in
12

S. Castano, M. Falduti, A. Ferrara et al.

Information Systems 106 (2022) 101842

techniques of CRIKE succeeds in discovering new, relevant terminology to enrich the LATO terminological knowledge and to
improve subsequent documents annotation stages. Ongoing research activities and experiments are aimed at extending the
current CRIKE framework with a pool of multi-label classification
techniques. The idea is to rely on a classifier like a random
forest or a neural network to detect the candidate terms to
extract for enrichment and to exploit black-box model explanation tools (e.g., LIME) to better support the legal expert in
choosing the terms that are relevant for document classification
and subsequent annotation.

‘‘legalese’’. However, the conventions of legalese are not always
used consistently, with intentional and unintentional ambiguities.
As a result, conventional text processing techniques have problems to successfully deal with such a non-standard structure of
documents.
Information retrieval techniques can be employed to detect
the occurrence of the terms associated with a concept throughout
the documents [4,28]. For example, term frequency based techniques for extracting specific terminology from text documents
have been successfully exploited in order to perform aspect extraction in sentiment analysis [29] and to automatically detect
product attributes in their textual description [30], by enforcing also a bootstrapping methodology [31]. Some contributions
are also being proposed in the framework of legal argumentation mining, that is the capability to automatically detect and
classify the role of possible argumentative units within a considered legal text [32,33]. On the automated recognition of concept
instances/applications inside the legal documents, the use of machine learning techniques is also being appearing. In [34], the authors propose to combine Natural Language Processing (NLP) and
machine learning techniques for mining relevant legal terms from
documents. The LUIMA approach characterized by sentence-level
annotations and reranking techniques has been also proposed to
enforce retrieval over a dataset of court decisions [35]. Moreover,
a particularly relevant contribution is provided in [36] about
extraction of case-law sentences for argumentation of statutory
terms. For training the classification models employed by machine learning tools, appropriate annotated datasets, that are
typically created by domain experts through manual activities,
are required. Sometimes, annotation requires agreement among
the experts and a number of technical discussions and decisionmaking processes need to be issued for reaching consensus [36].
Moreover, high-quality expert annotation can require time [37]
as well as specific technical background [38], depending on the
complexity of the concepts to recognize. All in all, manual annotation activities for training purposes can have high costs to be
supported, thus implying the availability of an adequate budget
that sometimes cannot be easily provided [39].
Original contribution. With respect to the above solutions, we
propose the LATO ontology knowledge model that is specifically
conceived to support modeling of abstract concept and corresponding relationships with statutory, descriptive, and modifier
classes. The peculiar feature of LATO is the capability to represent articulated structures that typically characterize abstract
concepts and vague/open-textured concepts in general. The use
of an extensible term-set associated with each abstract concept
represents an additional feature of LATO that allows to enrich
the ontology with new terminology as soon as it is recognized
in the documents. Furthermore, the CRIKE framework is defined
to exploit the legal knowledge of LATO with the aim at enforcing
effective legal concept exploration and retrieval. CRIKE requires
that only a basic term-set is defined for each legal concept, thus
a limited annotation activity is demanded to legal experts. Moreover, the use of automated extraction and enrichment techniques
in combination with a bootstrapping scheme enables CRIKE to
progressively improve the recognition of useful terminology to
associate with the LATO concepts. As a result, the involvement of
legal experts in manual annotation tasks is still limited as much
as possible.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
to influence the work reported in this paper.
References
[1] P. Poudyal, A machine learning approach to argument mining in legal
documents, in: Proc. of the Int. Workshop on AI Approaches To the
Complexity of Legal Systems, 2018.
[2] G. Sartor, P. Casanovas, M. Biasiotti, M. Fernández-Barrera, Approaches
to Legal Ontologies: Theories, Domains, Methodologies, Vol. 1, Springer
Science & Business Media, 2010.
[3] S. Thammaboosadee, S. Kiattisin, S. Darakorn, B. Watanapa, Sentence identification system based on criminal law ontology, Int. Rev. Law Comput.
Technol. 31 (3) (2017).
[4] R.S. Wagh, Knowledge discovery from legal documents dataset using text
mining techniques, Int. J. Comput. Appl. 66 (23) (2013).
[5] A. Rossi, R. Ducato, H. Haapio, S. Passera, M. Palmirani, Legal design
patterns: Towards a new language for legal information design, in: Proc.
of the 22nd Int. Legal Informatics Symposium, 2019.
[6] M. Grabmair, K.D. Ashley, Facilitating case comparison using value judgments and intermediate legal concepts, in: Proc. of the 13th Int. Conference
on Artificial Intelligence and Law, ACM, 2011, pp. 161–170.
[7] T.A. Endicott, Linguistic indeterminacy, Oxford J. Legal Stud. 16 (4) (1996)
667–697.
[8] K. Kress, Legal indeterminacy, California Law Rev. 77 (2) (1989) 283–337.
[9] K. Geert, R. Poscher, Vagueness and Law: Philosophical and Legal
Perspectives, Oxford University Press, 2016, pp. 1–20.
[10] T.E.M.C. for Drugs, D. Addiction, Italy, Country Drug Report 2018, Tech.
Rep., The European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drugs Addiction,
2018.
[11] S. Castano, M. Falduti, A. Ferrara, S. Montanelli, Crime knowledge extraction: An ontology-driven approach for detecting abstract terms in case law
decisions, in: Proc. of the 17th Int. Conf. on Artificial Intelligence and Law,
2019.
[12] A. Isaac, E. Summers, SKOS Simple Knowledge Organization System Primer,
Tech. Rep., Working Group Note, W3C, 2009.
[13] M. Palmirani, Legislative XML for the Semantic Web, Springer, 2011, pp.
101–130.
[14] N. Casellas, Legal Ontology Engineering: Methodologies, Modelling Trends,
and the Ontology of Professional Judicial Knowledge, Vol. 3, Springer
Science & Business Media, 2011.
[15] C. Griffo, J.P.A. Almeida, G. Guizzardi, A systematic mapping of the
literature on legal core ontologies, in: Proc. of the 7th Brazilian Symposium
on Ontology Research, ONTOBRAS 2015, Sao Paolo, Brazil, 2015, pp. 79–90.
[16] V. Leone, L. Di Caro, S. Villata, Taking stock of legal ontologies: a
feature-based comparative analysis, Artif. Intell. Law 28 (2) (2020).
[17] J. Saias, P. Quaresma, Law and the Semantic Web, Springer, 2005, pp.
185–200.
[18] D. Tiscornia, The LOIS project: Lexical ontologies for legal information
sharing, in: Proc. of the V Legislative XML Workshop, 2006, pp. 189–204.
[19] C.M. de Oliveira Rodrigues, F.L.G. calves de Freitas, E.F.S. Barreiros, R.R.
de Azevedo, A.T. de Almeida Filho, Legal ontologies over time: A systematic
mapping study, Expert Syst. Appl. 130 (1) (2019) 12–30.
[20] C. Bartolini, R. Muthuri, C. Santos, New frontiers in artificial intelligence, in:
M. Otake, S. Kurahashi, Y. Ota, K. Satoh, D. Bekki (Eds.), New Frontiers in
Artificial Intelligence, Springer International Publishing, 2017, pp. 233–248.
[21] M.E. Ghosh, H. Naja, H. Abdulrab, M. Khalil, Towards a legal rule-based
system grounded on the integration of criminal domain ontology and rules,
Procedia Comput. Sci. 112 (2017) 632–642.

8. Concluding remarks
The paper presented the CRIKE framework and related LATO
ontology knowledge model for supporting legal document exploration and retrieval. The experimental results on a real collection of court-decision documents show that the bootstrapping
13

S. Castano, M. Falduti, A. Ferrara et al.

Information Systems 106 (2022) 101842
[30] S. Raju, P. Pingali, V. Varma, An unsupervised approach to product attribute
extraction, in: European Conference on Information Retrieval, Springer,
2009, pp. 796–800.
[31] Q. Zhao, H. Wang, P. Lv, C. Zhang, A bootstrapping based refinement
framework for mining opinion words and targets, in: Proceedings of the
23rd ACM International Conference on Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management, 2014, pp. 1995–1998.
[32] K.D. Ashley, Artificial Intelligence and Legal Analytics: New Tools for Law
Practice in the Digital Age, Cambridge University Press, 2017.
[33] A. Nazarenko, A. Wyner, Legal NLP introduction, Trait. Autom. Des Lang.
58 (2) (2017) 7–19.
[34] J. Savelka, M. Grabmair, K.D. Ashley, Mining information from statutory
texts in multi-jurisdictional settings, in: Proc. of the Int. Conference on
Legal Knowledge and Information Systems, IOS Press, 2014, pp. 133–142.
[35] M. Grabmair, K.D. Ashley, R. Chen, P. Sureshkumar, C. Wang, E. Nyberg, V.R.
Walker, Introducing LUIMA: an experiment in legal conceptual retrieval of
vaccine injury decisions using a UIMA type system and tools, in: Proc. of
the 15th Int. Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, ACM, 2015, pp.
69–78.
[36] J. Savelka, K.D. Ashley, Extracting case law sentences for argumentation
about the meaning of statutory terms, in: Proc. of the 3rd Int. Workshop
on Argument Mining, Berlin, Germany, 2016, pp. 50–59.
[37] R. Mochales, M.-F. Moens, Argumentation mining, Artif. Intell. Law 19 (1)
(2011) 1–22.
[38] M. Saravanan, B. Ravindran, Identification of rhetorical roles for segmentation and summarization of a legal judgment, Artif. Intell. Law 18 (1) (2010)
45–76.
[39] K.D. Ashley, S. Brüninghaus, Automatically classifying case texts and
predicting outcomes, Artif. Intell. Law 17 (2) (2009) 125–165.

[22] C. Cevenini, G. Contissa, M. Laukyte, R. Riveret, R. Rubino, Development of
the ALIS IP ontology: Merging legal and technical perspectives, in: Proc.
of the the 2nd Topical Session on Computer-Aided Innovation, CAI2008,
Boston, MA, USA, 2008, pp. 169–180.
[23] A. Boer, R. Hoekstra, R. Winkels, The CLIME ontology, in: Proc. of the 2nd
Workshop on Legal Ontologies At the 14th Int. Conf. on Legal Knowledge
and Information System, JURIX 2011, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2001,
pp. 37–47.
[24] G. Ajani, G. Boella, L. Di Caro, L. Robaldo, L. Humphreys, S. Praduroux,
P. Rossi, A. Violato, European Legal taxonomy syllabus: A multi-lingual,
multi-level ontology framework to untangle the web of European legal
terminology, Appl. Ontol. 11 (4) (2017) 1–51.
[25] B. Fawei, J.Z. Pan, M.J. Kollingbaum, A.Z. Wyner, A semi-automated ontology construction for legal question answering, New Gener. Comput. 37 (4)
(2019) 453–478.
[26] S. Lovrencic, I.J. Tomac, Managing understatements in legislation acts when
developing legal ontologies, in: Proc. of the 10th Int. Conf. on Intelligent
Engineering Systems, INES2006, London, UK, 2006, pp. 69–73.
[27] N. Kiyavitskaya, N. Zeni, T.D. Breaux, A.I. Antón, J.R. Cordy, L. Mich,
J. Mylopoulos, Automating the extraction of rights and obligations for
regulatory compliance, in: Proc. of the 27th Int. Conf. on Conceptual
Modeling, ER2008, Barcelona, Spain, 2008, pp. 154–168.
[28] G. Lame, Law and the Semantic Web: Legal Ontologies, Methodologies,
Legal Information Retrieval, and Applications, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2005, pp. 169–184.
[29] T.A. Rana, Y.-N. Cheah, Aspect extraction in sentiment analysis:
comparative analysis and survey, Artif. Intell. Rev. 46 (4) (2016) 459–483.

14

