Computer Law & Security Review 52 (2024) 105903

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal
of Technology Law and Practice
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/clsr

Enforcing legal information extraction through context-aware techniques:
The ASKE approach
Silvana Castano a , Alfio Ferrara a , Emanuela Furiosi b , Stefano Montanelli a , Sergio Picascia a ,∗,
Davide Riva a , Carolina Stefanetti c
a

Università degli Studi di Milano, Department of Computer Science, Via Celoria, 18 20133 Milano, Italy

b IUSS Istituto Universitario di Studi Superiori di Pavia, Piazza della Vittoria, 15 27100 Pavia, Italy
c Università degli Studi di Milano, Department of Italian and Supranational Public Law, via Festa del Perdono, 7 20122 Milano, Italy

ARTICLE

INFO

Keywords:
Legal knowledge extraction
Natural Language Processing
Legal knowledge graph
Digital justice

ABSTRACT
To cope with the growing volume, complexity, and articulation of legal documents as well as to foster
digital justice and digital law, increasing effort is being devoted to legal knowledge extraction and digital
transformation processes. In this paper, we present the ASKE (Automated System for Knowledge Extraction)
approach to legal knowledge extraction, based on a combination of context-aware embedding models and
zero-shot learning techniques into a three-phase extraction cycle, which is executed a number of times (called
generations) to progressively extract concepts representative of the different meanings of terminology used in
legal documents chunks. A graph-based data structure called ASKE Conceptual Graph is initially populated
through a data preparation step, and it is continuously enriched at each ASKE generation with results
of document chunk classification, new extracted terminology, and newly derived concepts. A quantitative
evaluation of ASKE knowledge extraction and document classification is provided by considering the EurLex
dataset. Furthermore, we present the results of applying ASKE to a real case-study of Italian case law decisions
with qualitative feedback from legal experts in the framework of an ongoing national research project.

1. Introduction
Law plays a crucial role in almost every aspect of our life, both public and private. Thousands of legal documents are constantly produced
by institutional bodies, such as Parliaments and Courts, and constitute a prominent source of information and knowledge primarily for
judges, lawyers, and other legal practitioners involved in legal decisionmaking, but also for general subjects like citizens or private and public
organizations. Knowing how to navigate such a complex context both
in structure and content is a primary need for several categories of
users like legal practitioners, to support their professional activities,
administrators, to enforce law procedures, and generic users/citizens, to
enforce effective legal information exploration and exploitation [1].
The availability of a technology for extracting knowledge from legal
documents is not only desirable but even necessary, and the benefits and concrete outcomes that could result from the diffusion of
such technology are many and different for both legal practitioners
(i.e., lawyers, judges and Courts), administrations, and final users. Legal
search through legal knowledge extraction is an extremely important
instrument for legal practitioners in both common law [2] and civil
law [3] systems. Indeed, one of the milestone principles of law is the

certainty of law. For example, legal search over precedent case law may
be useful for a lawyer to retrieve a decision rendered in a case similar to
the case at hand, where the Court decided in a way that is favorable to
its client position, or a decision rendered in a different case on the basis
of a reasoning that, applied to the case at hand, leads to a favorable
interpretation of its client position [4]. When conducting case law
research, it is important to focus on both the decision of the case, but
also the motivation and the reasoning (called ‘‘rationale’’) behind the
decision. During this process, great help may come from knowledge extraction systems, especially if they are ‘‘context-aware’’. In the context
of administrative decisions, knowledge extraction from legal documents
could help public administrations to identify the legislation applicable
to the specific case, being able to ensure in-depth and always up-to-date
knowledge of any relevant legislation, including the most specific one.
Such technology could also be used to automate, at least in part, some
administrative processes, considering that in most European countries
the principle of ‘‘digital only’’ has been diffused, thus enabling the use
of legal search technologies as well [5–8]. From the point of view of
generic users/citizens, the development of knowledge extraction tools
could foster transparency, accessibility, and fairness within the legal

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address: sergio.picascia@unimi.it (S. Picascia).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2023.105903
Available online 24 October 2023
2212-473X/© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync-nd/4.0/).

S. Castano et al.

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105903

and the adoption of context-aware embedding models. Zero-shot learning techniques allow to deal with situations in which labeled datasets
are not available, which is the case of the legal field. Legal corpora
are usually not annotated and, when some annotation is available, it is
not suitable for fine-grained, sentence-level information retrieval tasks,
as expected. Common benchmarks of legal information retrieval, such
as the ones proposed for the TREC Legal Track [10] or the FIRE AILA
Track [11], require an entire document to be used as input in order to
retrieve precedents or similar cases. This is not the situation in which
legal actors would like to work, in that they prefer to retrieve specific
portions/sentences of a document, rather than going through an entire
document in order to find the section of interest.
Dealing with domain-specific text-processing applications, our cho
ice is for context-aware embedding models rather than non-contextual
ones (e.g., Word2Vec). The motivation is that the language employed
in the legal field is usually technical. Not only is the sentence structure
peculiar, but some terms may also assume completely different meaning
when used in different contexts/sentences of court decisions. Being
able to capture contextual information, such as the part of a document
where a certain idea is expressed, can be crucial when it comes to
distinguishing if a certain matter is treated in the introduction or in
the conclusion of a case law decision. Furthermore, we choose neural
embedding models over non-neural retrieval models (e.g., BM25) for
their ability to map concepts and documents in the same space.
After a data preparation step, knowledge extraction consists of the
execution of a cycle composed of three phases (see Fig. 1): (i) document chunk classification, (ii) terminology enrichment, (iii) concept
derivation.
The data preparation step performs the embedding of concepts and
document chunks into the same vector space using a context-aware
embedding model. In the document chunk classification phase, document
chunks are assigned to concepts by exploiting the similarity 𝜎 between
their respective vector representations. In the terminology enrichment
phase, ASKE assigns to a concept 𝑐 the most similar new terms occurring in document chunks classified under 𝑐 in the previous phase. In
the concept derivation phase, all the terms associated with each concept
𝑐 are submitted to a clustering algorithm to (possibly) derive new concept(s) representative of a cluster of highly similar terms. Results of the
knowledge extraction process populate the so-called ASKE Conceptual
Graph (ACG), organized according to the knowledge model described
in the following.

system, by equipping citizens with valuable insights and resources.
By granting easier access to legal documents such as laws, judicial
decisions, and administrative proceedings, it would empower citizens
with a better understanding of their rights and available opportunities.
To support case analysis and legal decision-making in an effective
way, advanced knowledge extraction solutions are thus demanded,
based on Natural Language Processing (NLP), Machine Learning (ML),
and Artificial Intelligence (AI), to deal with challenging requirements
posed by the legal documentation, such as the language complexity,
the significant length of the legal texts, the poor accessibility of legal
datasets that makes large-scale downloads challenging or even impossible, as well as the lack of sufficiently-large annotated corpora for model
training. Context-aware embedding techniques are being adopted to
address language complexity [9]: the whole chunk of text in which a
word appears is considered for the embedding construction, to better
deal with word-sense disambiguation and high domain-specificity of
the legal terminology.
In this paper, we present ASKE (Automated System for Knowledge
Extraction), an approach to legal knowledge extraction with focus on
abstract concept discovery a combination of context-aware embedding
models and zero-shot learning techniques. ASKE takes a corpus of legal
documents as input and it extracts a graph of concepts which are
used to classify the given documents at a chunk-level (e.g., paragraph)
granularity. Through context-aware embedding, document chunks and
concept definitions are projected in the same semantic space, to appropriately capture and manage the meaning of legal terminology by
taking into account the context in which terms are used. Through
zero-shot learning, a multi-label classification process is performed in
an unsupervised way, without relying on any pre-existing annotation
of legal documents. The distinguishing feature of ASKE is the implementation of a cyclic extraction process by which, at each cycle: (i)
embedded documents chunks are classified against the current concepts
(document chunk classification); (ii) new terminology recognized to be
relevant for/similar to a given concept is extracted and assigned to
the concept (terminology enrichment ); (iii) new concepts are possibly
derived based on the results of similarity-based term clustering (concept
derivation). A graph-based data structure called ACG (ASKE Conceptual
Graph) is initially populated through a data preparation step, and
it is continuously enriched at each ASKE generation with results of
document chunk classification, new extracted terminology, and newly
derived concepts. To evaluate the extraction process, we run ASKE
on a split of the EurLex dataset, containing 45,000 EU legislative
documents from the EUR-LEX portal annotated with concepts from
the EuroVoc taxonomy, and we use BERTopic and Zero-Shot TM as
baselines for the comparison. Then, we discuss the application of ASKE
to a real knowledge extraction case study based on a corpus of 50
Italian case law decisions, in the framework of the Next Generation UPP
(NGUPP) project, funded by the Italian Ministry of Justice, aiming at
providing artificial intelligence and advanced information management
techniques for the digital transformation of Italian legal processes and
digital justice in general.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present the
ASKE approach to legal knowledge extraction, with focus on the ACG
knowledge model and on classification/extraction techniques featuring
each ASKE cycle. In Section 3, we describe the ASKE evaluation to
assess the quality of the extraction and classification results against the
EurLex legal dataset. Section 4 is devoted to the presentation of a real
case study of using ASKE on a corpus of Italian case law decisions in
the framework of the NGUPP project. Section 5 discusses the related
work. Finally, in Section 6, we provide our concluding remarks.

2.1. The ASKE knowledge model
The ASKE knowledge model is organized as a graph-based data
structure called ASKE Conceptual Graph (ACG) whose conceptual sch
ema is shown in Fig. 2. ACG is based on three main entities, namely
document chunk, term, and concept.
• A document chunk corresponds to a portion (e.g., sentence)
of the original documents extracted through the application of
tokenization techniques. A document chunk 𝑘 has the form 𝑘 =
(𝑘𝑑 , ̄𝑘), where 𝑘𝑑 is the textual content of the chunk and ̄𝑘 is its
vector representation.
• A term corresponds to an n-gram occurring in a document chunk.
A term 𝑤 has form 𝑤 = (𝑤𝑙 , 𝑤𝑑 , ̄
𝑤), where 𝑤𝑙 is the label of the
term, 𝑤𝑑 is a description of the term meaning, and 𝑤̄ is its vector
representation.
• A concept represents the meaning of a set (i.e., a cluster) of
terms. A concept 𝑐 has the form 𝑐 = (𝑐𝑙 , ̄𝑐), where 𝑐𝑙 is the
label assigned to the concept and 𝑐̄ is its vector representation.
The label 𝑐𝑙 abstracts the meaning of the concept, expressing
it in a synthetic and human-understandable way. The label is
selected among the terms in the 𝑐 cluster.1 A concept is active by

2. The ASKE approach to legal knowledge extraction
The two main characteristics of the ASKE approach to legal knowledge extraction regard the exploitation of zero-shot learning techniques

1
In ASKE, the concept label corresponds to the term whose vector is closest
to the mean of the vectors of all the terms associated with the concept.

2

S. Castano et al.

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105903

Fig. 1. The ASKE knowledge extraction approach.

Fig. 2. The ASKE knowledge model.

3

S. Castano et al.

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105903

Fig. 3. Example of ASKE knowledge model instance.

default at its formation, meaning that it is used for classification
and enrichment purposes in subsequent generations unless it is
deactivated (i.e., ‘active’ attribute to False).2

2.2. Knowledge extraction with ASKE
In this section, we describe the data preparation step and the
techniques employed in each phase of the ASKE cycle for knowledge
extraction.

The following relationships are defined in ACG, to capture the
semantic relationships that hold between entities due to the ASKE
extraction process.

2.2.1. Data preparation
The two main inputs of ASKE are a corpus D = 𝑑1 , … , 𝑑𝑛 of legal
documents and a seed  provided by the user to trigger the extraction
process the first time. Data preparation consists in building the embeddings of both the corpus and the seed. Each document in the corpus is
preprocessed using a tokenizer that splits the text in a set of document
chunks K , providing the lemmatized version of the terms W therein
contained. An issue to be addressed for data preparation is related
to the definition of the logical document unit that should correspond
to a chunk (e.g., a single sentence or paragraph). A document chunk
should thus correspond to a logical unit within the document whose
length can provide enough information content for its practical usage
in application contexts. On the other side, the dimension of document
chunks should fit the constraints of the adopted embedding model
which generally works with a fixed-size window (e.g., 512 tokens).
Considering the writing style featuring legal documents, such as case
law documents, where sentences are generally rich and articulated for a
suitable argumentation, a single sentence is a good candidate to become
a document chunk. The seed provides the description of an initial target
concept to be used to trigger the first cycle of the ASKE knowledge
extraction process. To comply with different legal users and skills,
the initial description to provide as seed is kept ‘‘easy to formulate’’
according to the following options:

• The classification relationship between document chunks and
concepts represents the fact that a document chunk 𝑘 is assigned
to a concept 𝑐 during the document chunk classification phase
of the ASKE cycle. It is a ‘‘many-to-many’’ relationship in that a
multi-label classification process is enforced, whereby a document
chunk 𝑘 can be associated with more than one concept 𝑐.
• The derivation relationship between a pair of concepts represents
the fact that a concept 𝑐 ′ is derived from a concept 𝑐 during the
concept derivation phase of the ASKE cycle. The ID of the ASKE
generation at which the 𝑐 ′ has been derived from 𝑐 is maintained
as well as the similarity value between them.
• The originates from relationship between terms and concepts
represents the fact that a term 𝑤 enters the first time the ACG
being extracted from a document chunk classified under 𝑐.
• The belongs to relationship between terms and concepts represents the fact that a term 𝑤 belongs to the cluster of terms
associated with a concept 𝑐.
• The occurrence relationship between terms and document chu
nks represents the fact that a term 𝑤 occurs in a document chunk
𝑘.
Example 2.1. According to the ASKE knowledge model, in Fig. 3, we
show an example of document chunks, terms, and concepts extracted
from the EurLex dataset. Starting from the left, the document chunks
denote portions of text extracted from the legislative documents belonging to the dataset. In the center of the figure, we show terms that
occur in these document chunks (highlighted in bold in the chunks) and
that are also candidates for enriching the terminology of the concepts
in the ACG. Finally, on the right, we show concepts and related terms.
The derivation relationship is used to denote similarity relationships
between concepts that are created in different ASKE cycles.

1. query seed: the user provides a textual description of the initial
target concept in form of one or more textual queries (e.g., a
query can be a sentence taken from law/case law documentation);
2. keyword seed: the user provides a textual description of the initial
target concept in form of one or more keywords.
In the first case, the input query directly provides a textual definition
of the target concept, to be used for embedding the seed. In the second
case, the textual definition of the target concept is reconstructed by
ASKE exploiting the keyword(s) with the help of an external dictionary.
Current version of ASKE relies on WordNet in order to be able to
work with the majority of online legal datasets. In particular, for each
keyword term 𝑤 appearing in the seed, ASKE retrieves from WordNet

2
A deactivated concept is no longer used for document chunk classification
or knowledge enrichment purposes. Concept deactivation is explained in more
detail in Section 2.2.

4

S. Castano et al.

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105903

the definition associated with each sense of 𝑤; all retrieved definitions
are then exploited for seed embedding.
The last step of data preprocessing consists in transforming document chunks and the seed concept in their corresponding vector representation, projecting them in the same semantic space. This is achieved
using a pre-trained version of Sentence-BERT [12], a modification of
the original BERT model, which exploits siamese and triplets networks,
being able to derive semantically meaningful sentence embeddings.
Since the initial seed can be associated with multiple definitions, we define its position in the embedding space as the centroid 𝑐̄𝑖 of 𝑤̄ 𝑖1 , … , 𝑤̄ 𝑖𝑗 .
As a result of the data preparation step, document chunks and the set
of terms in the initial seed will populate the first version of the ACG.

cases capital charges should apply to default fund contributions and to trade
exposures with other CCPs. In order to avoid contagion effects, the treatment
regarding default fund contributions to other CCPs should in general be more
conservative than the treatment of credit institution exposures to CCPs. The
own resources of a CCP used to contribute to the default fund of another
CCP should not be taken into account for the purposes of Article 16(2) of
Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 as they are not invested in accordance with
its investment policy. They should also not be double-counted for the purpose
of calculating risk weighted exposures stemming from these contributions’’.
If a concept does not classify any document chunk, it is deactivated.
Concept deactivation can occur as the extraction process progresses,
such as when a newly derived concept results more appropriate to
classify document chunks at subsequent generation, thus leaving an
older concept useless, or when a newly defined concept at current
generation is not effectively used for classification purposes at the
subsequent cycle.

2.2.2. Document chunk classification
In this phase, ASKE performs the zero-shot multi-label classification
of document chunks. Document chunks are assigned to zero, one, or
multiple concepts, 𝑓 ∶ K → , without having the model exposed
to training examples. This is possible due to the coexistence of the
embeddings of concepts and document chunks in the same vector space.
A similarity measure 𝜎, i.e., cosine similarity, is computed between
the embedding vector ̄𝑘 of each document chunk and the embedding
vector 𝑐̄ of each concept respectively. An association relationship is
eventually defined between them if their similarity is higher than or
equal to a predefined threshold 𝛼:
̄ 𝑐̄𝑖 ) ≥ 𝛼}
𝑓 (𝑘, ) = {𝑐𝑖 ∈ 𝐶 ∶ 𝜎(𝑘,

2.2.3. Terminology enrichment
For each concept 𝑐𝑖 , ASKE retrieves the set of terms W𝑖 appearing
in the document chunks K𝑖 which are classified with 𝑐𝑖 in the ACG.
Then, these terms are placed in the same embedding space of concepts
and document chunks, by computing the vector representation of their
definition(s) 𝑤𝑑 retrieved from the external dictionary. The terms that
are absent from such a dictionary are ignored. For this reason, the
employed dictionary must be characterized by the following features:
(1) being sufficiently general, and (2) being sufficiently large, to encompass as many terms from the corpus as possible, as well as to avoid
a priori restrictions of the search space. In the case of polysemous
terms, only the definition whose embedding is the closest to concept
embedding 𝑐̄𝑖 is considered. This characteristic allows ASKE to consider
each term with the most appropriate sense in that context. For example,
terms that have a specific meaning in the legal field will be taken into
consideration by considering their domain-specific sense, rather than a
general one.
For each term, the similarity 𝜎 between its embedding vector and
the vectors of the concept 𝑐𝑖 and the vectors of its associated document
chunks K𝑖 is computed. The terms whose similarity is greater than or
equal to threshold 𝛽 are selected and become candidates for enriching
the terminology of 𝑐𝑖 .

(1)

The value of the threshold 𝛼 is crucial since it may remarkably affect
the classification output. Choosing a high value of 𝛼 will result in a high
value of precision of the classification on one side, while, on the other
side, in a small set of document chunks for each concept. On the other
hand, picking a low value of 𝛼 will result in a higher recall but also lots
of false positives. Appropriate ranges and threshold values have been
determined on an experimental basis (see Section 3).
In the first execution of the ASKE cycle, the initial version of
the ACG is considered and document chunks are classified against
the initial seed concept. In subsequent executions, the number of
concepts increases due to the terminology enrichment and concept
derivation phases, and document chunks can be assigned to more than
one concept, depending on the computed similarity measures.
Example 2.2. Considering as document corpus the EurLex dataset,
which contains documents from the Official Journal of the European
Union and will be discussed in detail in Section 3, and ‘‘accounting system’’ as keyword seed, the following document chunk is classified under
the ‘‘accounting system’’ concept after the document chunk classification
phase:
‘‘Notwithstanding the difficulties in quantifying the exposure to operational risk, Directive 2006/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 14 June 2006 relating to the taking up and pursuit of the business
of credit institutions is the relevant benchmark for the purpose of establishing
the capital requirement for CCPs. Consistently with Directive 2006/48/EC,
the definition of operational risk should include legal risk in respect of technical standards on capital requirements for central counterparties. Directive
2006/48/EC and Directive 2006/49/EC of the European Parliament and
of the Council of 14 June 2006 on the capital adequacy of investment firms
and credit institutions are an appropriate benchmark for the purpose of
establishing capital requirements to cover credit, counterparty and market
risks non covered by specific financial resources, since they are similar to
those carried out by credit institutions or investment firms. A CCP does
not have to hold capital for trade exposures and default fund contributions
which arise under an interoperability arrangement where the requirements of
Articles 52 and 53 of Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 are fulfilled. However,
where these requirements are not fulfilled, links between CCPs might expose
them to additional risk if the collateral posted by them is not fully protected
and bankruptcy remote or if the default fund contributions are at risk in
case a clearing member of the receiving CCP defaults. Therefore, in such

𝑔(𝑐𝑖 , K , W ) = {𝑤ℎ ∈ W𝑖 ∶ 𝜎(𝑤̄ ℎ , 𝑐̄𝑖 ) + 𝜎(𝑤̄ ℎ , K̄𝑖 ) ≥ 𝛽}

(2)

where K̄𝑖 is the centroid of the embedding vectors of document chunks
in K𝑖 .
The set of candidate terms is then sorted in descending order
according to their similarity 𝜎. In addition, a learning rate 𝛾 can also
be defined, representing the maximum number of terms that will be
associated with a certain concept at each generation. Applying an upper
bound 𝛾 and lower bound 𝛽 ensures that, at each cycle, the process
of terminology enrichment will include only a small set of candidate
terms that are supposed to be meaningful with respect to the concept
at hand. During our tests, we found that the most satisfactory results
are obtained by setting 𝛽 and 𝛾 in the range 0.2 ≤ 𝛽 ≤ 0.4 and 3 ≤ 𝛾 ≤ 7,
respectively.
Example 2.3. Considering the document chunk reported in Section 2.2.2, ‘‘bankruptcy’’, ‘‘financial’’, ‘‘regulation’’ and ‘‘EC’’ are examples of new terms extracted in the terminology enrichment phase.
After retrieving and embedding their definitions, we compute their
similarity with concept ‘‘accounting system’’ according to Eq. (2). The
terms ‘‘regulation’’ and ‘‘EC’’ are discarded as they don’t satisfy the
lower bound 𝛽 on the similarity with the concept.
Together with ‘‘bankruptcy’’ and ‘‘financial’’, new terms extracted
in the same way from other document chunks classified with concept ‘‘accounting system’’ include ‘‘accounting standard’’, ‘‘balance sheet’’,
‘‘review’’, ‘‘audit’’, ‘‘internal control’’, ‘‘GAAP’’, ‘‘accounting’’, and ‘‘fiscal’’.
5

S. Castano et al.

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105903

Table 1
EurLex dataset statistics.

2.2.4. Concept derivation
The last phase of the ASKE cycle is devoted to concept derivation
whereby new concepts are (possibly) introduced in the ACG. To enforce
concept derivation, for each concept 𝑐𝑖 in the current ACG, the embedding vectors 𝑤̄ of the terms belonging to it are clustered using the
Affinity Propagation algorithm [13]. Affinity propagation determines
the number of resulting clusters without having the user explicitly
specifying it, and allows for outliers, meaning that an observation may
constitute a cluster on its own if it is found too dissimilar from all the
others.
On the basis of the clusters obtained from a concept 𝑐𝑖 in the current
ACG, concept derivation consists in the following operations in the new
ACG:

N. Documents
N. Labels from EuroVoc
Max. Labels per Document
Avg. Labels per Document
Avg. Words per Document

Train split

Entire dataset

45,000
4,108
26
∼5
∼729

57,000
4,271
26
∼5
∼727

3. Evaluating ASKE
A quantitative evaluation of the ASKE approach was conducted on
a split of the EurLex dataset [14] containing 45,000 EU legislative
documents in English from the EUR-LEX portal.3 Documents include
regulations, directives and decisions from the European Commission
and the Council of the EU, each of which is annotated by the Publication Office of the EU with one or more labels from the EuroVoc
thesaurus4 EuroVoc is a taxonomical and multilingual thesaurus of
terms pertaining to the activities of the EU in several domains. Labels
at the high, more general levels of the taxonomy tend to correspond
to general topics or abstract concepts, while labels at lower levels
represent specific entities (e.g. formal institutions, animal species involved in regulations, etc.). Since EuroVoc does not satisfy our two
requirements for a suitable external dictionary (see Section 2.2.3), we
only use EuroVoc for evaluation, and we adopt WordNet as an external
dictionary for ASKE. While the dataset has originally been presented
for Large-scale Multi-label Text Classification (LMTC) task, we use it in
a Knowledge Extraction perspective exploiting EuroVoc concepts and
entities as ground truth. Dataset statistics are summarized in Table 1.
The evaluation objective is twofold:

1. a new concept 𝑐𝑗 is defined for each resulting cluster 𝐶𝑙𝑗 ;
2. the label of 𝑐𝑗 is chosen as the term closest to the centroid of 𝐶𝑙𝑗 .
The cluster 𝑐𝑗 that contains the term 𝑤 corresponding to the label
of 𝑐𝑖 is said to ‘‘conserve’’ 𝑐𝑖 in the resulting ACG; for all other
concepts, 𝑐𝑗 represents a truly new concept in the resulting ACG,
and a derivation relationship is defined between 𝑐𝑖 and 𝑐𝑗 ;
3. for each newly defined concept 𝑐𝑗 , a deduplication check is
performed: if all the terms associated with 𝑐𝑗 already belong to
an existing concept 𝑐 in the current ACG, then 𝑐 is maintained
in the new ACG while 𝑐𝑗 is discarded (that is, the older concept
preempts the younger).
Example 2.4. When applied to terms extracted in the example of
Section 2.2.3, the concept derivation phase produces concepts:
1. ‘‘audit’’, a new concept derived from ‘‘accounting system’’ to represent the cluster containing terms ‘‘audit’’ and ‘‘review’’;
2. ‘‘accounting’’, a new concept derived from ‘‘accounting system’’ to
represent the cluster containing terms (‘‘accounting’’ and ‘‘balance sheet’’);
3. ‘‘financial’’, a new concept derived from ‘‘accounting system’’ to
represent the cluster containing (‘‘financial’’ and ‘‘fiscal’’);
4. ‘‘bankruptcy’’, a new concept derived from ‘‘accounting system’’ to
represent the term ‘‘bankruptcy’’ alone (singleton cluster);
5. ‘‘accounting system’’, which is the conservation of the original
concept, associated with the cluster containing remaining terms,
i.e. ‘‘accounting standard’’, ‘‘internal control’’, ‘‘GAAP’’ and the
term corresponding to the seed concept ‘‘accounting system’’.

1. to evaluate the quality of the Knowledge Extraction process
in terms of the resulting knowledge model, by assessing the
capability of ASKE to reconstruct the EuroVoc labels as extracted
concepts, and
2. to evaluate the quality of the Document Classification process,
by assessing the correctness of ASKE concepts assigned to each
document against the ground truth labels.
Given the ground truth dataset, we will first describe the evaluation
setting, and then present the experimental results.
3.1. Evaluation setting

As a consequence of the de-duplication check, concept ‘‘accounting’’
is discarded as its term cluster is a subset of the cluster of concept
‘‘financial statement’’, previously derived from another seed concept.

While most evaluation methodologies in the field of Knowledge
Extraction are based on exact or partial matching, the interest towards
semantic-aware evaluation techniques has been rising in recent years in
related fields, such as Machine Translation [15–17]. Such metrics aim
at solving the problem of assessing the correctness of the meaning of the
translated sentence, rather than its string form, which may differ due to
the use of synonyms, paraphrases or circumlocutions. In the same way,
in all our evaluation objectives, we want to evaluate concepts extracted
by ASKE based on their semantic content and independently from
their syntactical form (i.e., identifying term), which is only defined to
provide a human-readable representation.
Inspired by YiSi [16], a metric originally proposed to evaluate
Machine Translation from a semantic perspective, and FDTC [18], a
metric to assess the quality of document-term co-clusters using word
embeddings, we adopted an evaluation technique based on global (noncontextual) embeddings. Having trained a global embedding model on
the whole corpus and the ground truth labels, the extracted concepts
can be evaluated against the ground truth (EuroVoc or a subset of

2.2.5. ASKE endpoint
Concept derivation phase concludes the extraction cycle and the
current ASKE generation. The resulting ACG, with newly
defined/maintained concepts, associated labels, terms and relationships constitute the input for activating a new generation. The ASKE
extraction process on a given corpus may continue for a number of
generations. Decision to run a new ASKE generation is taken by the
user on the basis of the extraction results in the current generation. The
user can decide to stop running ASKE after the current cycle if extracted
knowledge is considered satisfactory or if poor new terminology has
been extracted with respect to the previous generation. There is,
however, a formal condition for the termination of the ASKE extraction
process on a given document corpus, that is, when no new terminology
is extracted in the current generation. In this case, the user is notified
that a new cycle is not triggered (i.e., ASKE reaches its endpoint). If the
corpus is extended with new documents, the extraction process can be
started again, using the last ACG version as the input seed for the new
extended corpus.

3
4

6

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/homepage.html.
https://op.europa.eu/s/yTaY.

S. Castano et al.

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105903

it) by computing the similarity between the embedding vectors of the
two instead of the exact matching. As a global embedding model, we
adopted FastText for its capacity to model out-of-vocabulary words by
exploiting sub-word information while performing at the same level as
previous models on word similarity and word analogy tasks [19].
Given a set  of extracted concepts, the set G of ground truth labels,
and the embedding model 𝐅, then a pseudo-precision metric can be
defined as:
1 ∑
𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑔∈G 𝜎(𝐅(𝑐), 𝐅(𝑔))
(3)
𝑃̂ =
|| 𝑐∈
where 𝜎 is the cosine similarity.
Conversely, a pseudo-recall metric can be defined as:
1 ∑
𝑅̂ =
𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑐∈ 𝜎(𝐅(𝑐), 𝐅(𝑔))
|G| 𝑔∈G

associated with an explicit definition and which don’t have any broader
term in the taxonomy structure, so that they can be considered as ‘‘root
labels’’. These labels are: accounting system, adaptation to climate change,
administrative check, administrative sanction, code of conduct, credit guarantee, emission allowance, emission trading, entrepreneurship, ESC opinion,
EU body, EU financing, European Central Bank opinion, European Union,
financing of the EU budget, futures market, gender equality, geochemistry,
household, referendum, soil conditioning, teleworking, vocational training.
The number of concepts and terms that ASKE extracts from the
EurLex corpus with this setting is shown in Fig. 4, which represents the
configurations that produce better results in our experiments, i.e. 𝛼, 𝛽 ∈
[0.2, 0.4] with 𝛾 = 5.
We notice that the number of concepts extracted by ASKE in its
most prolific configuration (𝛼 = 𝛽 = 0.3) surpasses 1,000 at generation
15 and the number of topics produced by BERTopic at generation 21.
It is crucial to evaluate whether the growth in quantity of extracted
concepts corresponds to an improvement in their quality.
In terms of execution time, the first generation of ASKE is the
most expensive, requiring ∼ 14 seconds per concept, due to the additional work to embed initial concepts. Then, time per concept rapidly
decreases towards a cost around 2 and 3 seconds.6

(4)

Indeed, false positives will have no high-similarity correspondence
in G, thus reducing 𝑃̂ , while false negatives will have no high-similarity
̂ The resulting metrics are analocorrespondence in , thus reducing 𝑅.
gous to YiSi metrics, except for the absence of word frequency-related
weights.
In evaluation objective (1), extracted concepts are compared against
all EuroVoc labels that are present in the EurLex dataset. Since the
ASKE approach considers concepts as clusters of terms, the embedding
vector of a concept 𝑐 is computed as the center of the embedding
vectors of the terms that constitute it (i.e. an average linkage approach is
adopted). EuroVoc labels, instead, can be straightforwardly embedded
as individual terms.
As for objective (2), we compute 𝑃̂ and 𝑅̂ and average the results at
the document level. Then we compute the mean and standard deviation
of the document-level metrics.
No benchmark is available for our task in the legal domain, and
topic models are suitable competitors in the concept extraction and
document classification tasks. In particular, neural topic models based
on contextual embeddings offer an ideal baseline, exploiting techniques
that are similar to ours. Therefore, for all objectives, ASKE is compared
against:

3.2.1. Evaluation of concept extraction
In Fig. 5, we display the mean and standard deviation of 𝑃̂ and 𝑅̂
for the evaluation of objective (1), i.e. concept extraction.
While suffering a substantial gap in pseudo-recall at earlier generations, ASKE achieves state-of-the-art performance within 15 generations, with a growing trend resulting from the extraction of new
concepts. Mean pseudo-precision never falls much below the best performance achieved by the baselines, proving that, even when the
number of concepts gets higher, ASKE captures concepts that are closer
to the ground truth ones. The pseudo-precision curve is not monotonous
since concepts acquire new terms at every generation, thus moving in
the vector space, but it presents a weakly decreasing trend with small
changes in standard deviation after few generations. The precision–
recall curve shows an improvement over the baseline models despite
this trend. Finally, we notice that performance is almost unaffected by
the choice of hyperparameters 𝛼 and 𝛽 in the feasible ranges. 𝛽 has a
weaker impact than 𝛼, and the impact of the latter is non-linear, 𝛼 = 0.3
yielding slightly better results when compared to 𝛼 = 0.2 or 𝛼 = 0.4.
In Table 2 we provide numerical results, considering generation
15 and 21 of the ASKE cycle in order to approximate the number of
topics extracted, respectively, by ZSTM@1000 and BERTopic. A more
detailed look at means and standard deviations of 𝑃̂ and 𝑅̂ reveals that
our model always performs at least at the same level of the baselines,
albeit presenting higher variability in 𝑃̂ with respect to ZSTM and in
𝑅̂ with respect to BERTopic. At generation 15, 𝑃̂ is substantially equal
to that of ZSTM@1000, but ASKE performs better in terms of ̂
𝑅, at the
expense of marginally higher variability. At generation 21, ASKE beats
both baselines, with 𝑃̂ substantially at the same level as ZSTM@2000
but presenting a diminished variability in ̂
𝑅.
The most positive aspect of these results is the fact that the good
performances of ASKE are obtained without the need to define in
advance the expected number of concepts, which is in many cases
impossible and hardly compatible with the need for an exploratory
investigation of a textual corpus.
Performing a qualitative error analysis by looking at proxies (most
similar concepts) to ground truth labels, we found that false negatives,
i.e. labels that have no high-similarity correspondence in the extracted
concepts, are mostly located at the lowest levels of the taxonomy,

• BERTopic [20], a state-of-the-art unsupervised approach to topic
modeling based on transformers that, analogously to ASKE, doesn’t
require a predefined number of topics;
• Zero-Shot TM (ZSTM) [21], a topic model which exploits document contextual embeddings to extract a predefined number of
topics and perform zero-shot classification of documents.
We experiment with 4 configurations for ZSTM and 2 for BERTopic
due to the need to set the number of topics in the former. In particular,
the number of topics extracted by ZSTM is set to 1,000 and 2,000 to
match the order of magnitude of the number of concepts extracted by
ASKE. In each case, we retain 5 terms per topic as it approximates the
average term-per-topic ratio of our approach, plus we try with 10 terms
per topic. As for BERTopic, we retain again 10 terms per topic, plus we
evaluate a configuration in which terms within the lowest 5% quantile
of TF-IDF score are filtered out so to reduce the occurrences of stop
words in the results. Thus the final number of baseline models amounts
to 6.
3.2. Experimental results
Experiments are run under various configurations of hyperparameters 𝛼 and 𝛽 (which impact document chunk classification and term
enrichment phases, respectively), and number of ASKE generations (up
to 21), using allmpnet-base-v25 as embedding model. As seed
keywords, we select 23 concepts from the EuroVoc thesaurus which are

5

6
The computation time refers to the current Python implementation of
ASKE, configured with 𝛼 = 𝛽 = 0.3 and 𝛾 = 5, executed on a Ubuntu 20.04.4
LTS server with 8 CPUs, endowed with NVIDIA A100 80 GB PCIe GPU and
CUDA 11.8.

https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2.
7

S. Castano et al.

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105903

Fig. 4. Number of concepts (bars) and terms (points) extracted by ASKE under different hyperparameter configurations and through the 21 generations, compared with the
baselines. The number of terms retrieved by the baseline models was not reported as it can be straightforwardly derived by multiplying the number of concepts by 5 or 10. The
filtered version of BERTopic, instead, retains 18,574 terms.

Fig. 5. Results for concept extraction task: mean 𝑃̂ , ̂
𝑅, and 𝑃̂ − 𝑅̂ curve. For the sake of clarity the standard deviations of baseline models were omitted from this chart, while
for ASKE only standard deviation of the model with 𝛼 = 𝛽 = 0.3 is shown, differing little from other configurations.

8

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105903

S. Castano et al.

Table 2
Means and standard deviations (sd) of 𝑃̂ and 𝑅̂ for the best configuration of ASKE and
the baselines. According to a Welch t-test, difference between ASKE best results and
baseline best results is found to be statistically significant for 𝑅̂ with 𝑝-value < 0.01,
and for 𝑃̂ with 𝑝-value < 0.1.
Mean 𝑃̂ (sd)
Mean 𝑅̂ (sd)
𝐹̂
ASKE (𝛼 = 𝛽 = 0.3, gen. 15)
ASKE (𝛼 = 𝛽 = 0.3, gen. 21)

0.832 (0.090)
0.831 (0.087)

0.790 (0.116)
0.811 (0.102)

0.810
0.821

ZSTM@1000 (T@5)
ZSTM@1000 (T@10)
ZSTM@2000 (T@5)
ZSTM@2000 (T@10)
BERTopic (raw)
BERTopic (filtered)

0.810 (0.065)
0.830 (0.045)
0.807 (0.071)
0.829 (0.046)
0.778 (0.134)
0.780 (0.135)

0.765 (0.102)
0.761 (0.103)
0.753 (0.112)
0.752 (0.107)
0.794 (0.099)
0.794 (0.099)

0.787
0.794
0.779
0.789
0.786
0.788

by the Italian Ministry of Justice, aiming at providing artificial intelligence and advanced information management techniques for digital
transformation of Italian legal processes and digital justice in general.
The application is based on a corpus of 50 Italian case law decisions,
retrieved from different legal data banks; all the considered documents
concern first degree verdicts regarding the matter of unfair competition
in the sale of commercial products, coming from different courts on
the Italian territory. Unfortunately, such kind of documents does not
always come in ready-to-use formats: text has to be extracted from
PDF files having different structures depending on the court emitting
it. Despite this heterogeneity in the structure of the documents, we do
not employ any particular data cleaning process aimed at removing
noise from the text. Operating on smaller portions of text, i.e. document
chunks, instead of considering the document as a whole, allows us to
ignore this issue given that the irrelevant chunks will not be taken into
account in the knowledge extraction process.
In the following, we consider two different use-cases of ASKE. The
first use-case, denoted as UC-A, is about a legal practitioner with a given
case law of interest whose goal is to exploit ASKE to obtain pertinent
provisions and rules of law as well as scholar interpretations and Court
decisions. As a further use-case, denoted as UC-B, we consider a general
subject, like a citizen, a company, or Public Administration employee,
interested in improving the general knowledge and understanding of
the considered general subject (i.e., unfair competition in the sale of
commercial products). Due to the different legal expertise of the two
individuals, we define two different types of seed provided by the legal
practitioner and the general subject respectively. For the legal practitioner in UC-A, we consider the following query seed: acts likely to cause
confusion. For the general subject in UC-B, we consider the following
keyword seed: imitation, bag, distinctive elements. The two seeds specified
in the Italian language have been used to trigger ASKE and they are
reported here in English for the sake of readability. We setup a configuration with 21 generations and hyperparameters 𝛼 = 𝛽 = 0.3. To collect
enough terminology for an effective clustering, we perform the concept
derivation phase every three generations. The employed embedding
model,8 namely paraphrase-multilingual-MiniLM-L12-v2,
supports multiple languages and thus it can be used to manage Italian
documents. As external dictionary, we relied on Open Multilingual
WordNet [22], which provides access to WordNets in a variety of
languages, including Italian.
In terms of execution time of both UC-A and UC-B, in the first
generation, ASKE requires ∼ 11 seconds per concept. The time per
concept rapidly decreases towards a cost around 1 and 2 seconds.9
In Table 4, we report some statistics about the elements of ACG
during the ASKE execution at each generation.
We note that the number of concepts  and terms W are still
growing after 21 generations, even though the rate of growth is much
smaller compared to the initial ASKE generations. We also note that the
ratio of terms-per-concept W ∕ stabilizes around 4 from the generation
#13. The ‘‘Maintained ’’ are concepts of a generation that come from
the previous generation, while the ‘‘New ’’ are the new concepts derived in the current generation. ‘‘Deactivated ’’ refers to the concepts
having the active attribute set to False, meaning that they do not have
associated document chunks. ‘‘Discarded ’’ are concepts that have
been dropped in the concept derivation phase.

Table 3
Results for document classification (with standard deviation) of ASKE model with
hyperparameters 𝛼 = 𝛽 = 0.3 at generations 0, 15 and 21, compared with the best
performing configuration of the baseline models. All differences between the best and
second-best results were found to be statistically significant, with 𝑝-value < 0.01, by
performing a Welch t-test.
Mean 𝑃̂ (sd)
Mean 𝑅̂ (sd)
𝐹̂
ASKE (gen. 0)
ASKE (gen. 15)
ASKE (gen. 21)

0.502 (0.091)
0.585 (0.065)
0.583 (0.070)

0.478 (0.101)
0.670 (0.074)
0.643 (0.080)

0.490
0.625
0.612

BERTopic (filtered)
ZSTM@1000 (T@10)
ZSTM@2000 (T@10)

0.538 (0.079)
0.628 (0.079)
0.630 (0.080)

0.559 (0.075)
0.594 (0.082)
0.597 (0.085)

0.548
0.611
0.613

corresponding to real-world entities (e.g. names of regions or provinces,
specific institutions as anti-dumping duty, EU Accession Treaty, World
Intellectual Property Organization, etc.) rather than abstract concepts,
most of which were correctly retrieved (e.g. public contract, healthcare,
banking, aquaculture, etc.). Conversely, false positives, i.e. concepts that
have no high-similarity correspondence in the ground truth label set,
reveal an occasional excess of generality, which is manifested in the
retrieval of out-of-domain concepts such as call (in the sense of phone
call), field (in the sense of sector), claim, form, etc.
3.2.2. Evaluation of document classification
Table 3 reports the evaluation results for document classification
(objective (2)), considering the ASKE model with 𝛼 = 𝛽 = 0.3, which
is the hyperparameter configuration yielding the best results, and the
baseline models.
From the table, it can be appreciated how concept extraction affects
classification as well: after 15 generations, performance has already
improved substantially, while it tends to stabilize at later generations.7
Indeed, ASKE is outperformed by both baselines at generation 0, but it
achieves significantly higher and less dispersed 𝑃̂ and 𝑅̂ as the number
of generations grows. Both at 1000 extracted concepts (generation 15
for ASKE) and 2000 (generation 21), obtained pseudo-precision still
falls below ZSTM, while pseudo-recall is superior. This outcome, in
the field of legal search, is particularly desirable to ensure an adequate
coverage of the jurisprudence of interest. All in all, our model achieves
state-of-the-art performance for the document classification task as
well, also in this case with no need to pre-define the expected number
of concepts.
4. ASKE at work in a real application
In this section, we describe the application of ASKE to a case study
in the framework of the Next Generation UPP (NGUPP) project, funded

8
Model available at https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/
paraphrase-multilingual-MiniLM-L12-v2.
9
The computation time refers to the current Python implementation of
ASKE, configured with 𝛼 = 𝛽 = 0.3 and 𝛾 = 5, executed on a Ubuntu 20.04.4
LTS server with 8 CPUs, endowed with NVIDIA A100 80 GB PCIe GPU and
CUDA 11.8.

7
This outcome holds true for any hyperparameter combination we
experimented with.

9

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105903

S. Castano et al.

Fig. 6. A portion of the ACG related to the use-case UC-A.

Table 4
Summary statistics for each generation of the ASKE cycle run on the 50 Italian case law decisions.
Generation





∕

Maintained 

New 

Deactivated 

Discarded 

∕

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

2
2
2
10
10
10
42
41
41
110
104
103
182
176
172
239
234
228
281
276
270
302

11
21
31
41
76
115
154
266
344
411
523
595
663
766
822
881
1021
1081
1121
1225
1283
1317

5.5
10.5
15.5
4.1
7.6
11.5
3.67
6.49
8.39
3.74
5.03
5.78
3.64
4.35
4.78
3.69
4.36
4.74
3.99
4.44
4.75
4.36

0
2
2
2
10
10
10
42
41
41
110
104
103
182
176
172
239
234
228
281
276
270

2
0
0
8
0
0
34
0
0
91
0
0
121
0
0
134
0
0
111
0
0
98

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
21
0
0
47
0
0
62
0
0
54

0
0
0
0
0
0
2
1
0
19
6
1
21
6
4
20
5
6
0
1
6
12

503.5
445.5
508.0
692.8
691.6
697.4
711.57
712.71
721.85
704.13
752.25
777.67
701.92
743.94
758.32
675.42
721.44
756.74
666.2
722.8
752.69
633.21

4.1. UC-A: ASKE for legal practitioners

such as to become inherent, in the image with the consumer, of the
product itself; (2) the absence of distinctive elements capable of showing
that the origin of one product is different from that of the other.

As mentioned before, the seed used for UC-A is acts likely to cause
confusion. The choice of the seed is very appropriate from a practitioner’s perspective because the seed is a portion of a provision of law
on unfair competition (in the present case, art. 2598 of the Italian Civil
Code). In Fig. 6, we show a portion of the ACG returned by ASKE.
As a general consideration, legal experts noted that the extracted
concepts describe notions that are generally pertinent to the given seed.
This is true for example for the link between the notion of confusion
(included in the seed) and the concepts exemplify, clarification and
limitation extracted by ASKE. Again, the likeliness of causing confusion
expressed in the seed is pertinent to the notion of relevance (concept
relevant ) and to concepts prudence, debate, caution, and dispute, in
the sense that a behavior that is relevant in potentially determining
confusion might lead to a debate or a dispute and, hence, should be
performed with prudence and caution. The same can be said for the link
between the notion of confusion included in the seed and the related
concepts of question and hindrance.
From the specific practitioner perspective, the text chunks associated with a given concept have been evaluated as useful if returned
as answers to a legal research involving that concept. For example,
hereafter we report the top-2 document chunks similar to the initial
seed acts likely to cause confusion:

[...] (b) conversely, infringement only exists where there is a likelihood of confusion for the public, consisting even in a mere danger
of association between the distinctive elements. Prerequisites for the
aforementioned discipline to operate, therefore, are: (i) the existence of
substantial identity or similarity between the signs; (ii) their use for goods
and services that belong to the same sector and are intended to satisfy
the same market requirements; (iii) identity of characteristics in the eyes
of the same average consumer or only relative affinity.
These chunks are explanations of the legal concept of likelihood to
cause confusion, one of the key elements for assessing unfair competition. These chunks are thus pertinent for the purpose and goals of
a legal research on unfair competition. A legal practitioner can explore
these two chunks and all other text chunks associated with the concept
acts likely to cause confusion to analyze examples of rules of law that
may be applicable to the case currently at hand. Indeed, the main focus
of practitioners’ work is interpretation with the ultimate purpose of
solving legal issues: practitioners, both lawyers and judges, exploit text
chunks associated with a given concept for interpretation, in order to
understand whether they fit a specific factual case and are suitable for
solving it.

Suitability to cause confusion, therefore, consists of two elements: (1) the
originality of the imitated product, endowed with distinctive capacity,
10

S. Castano et al.

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105903

Fig. 7. A portion of the ACG related to the use-case UC-B.

If we consider the first relevant chunk above, which pertains to
the concept of borsa as an object, we can see that it provides valuable
information to the user. For instance, it highlights that the resemblance
between two objects becomes significant when this resemblance, characterized by specific distinctive elements, has the potential to confuse
and mislead consumers who are considering a purchase. The knowledge
extraction experiment has been evaluated positively in terms of its
significance and applicability by non-expert users in the project. Understanding and navigating the intricate legal landscape, with its complex
structure and content, is hard or even nearly impossible for final users
and citizens, even considering small-size corpora of legal documents.
The possibility to visualize and interact with the ACG representing
the extracted knowledge has been considered a very important and
valuable feature for a non-expert user. The potential benefits and
practical outcomes that could arise from the widespread adoption of the
ASKE approach have been evaluated as very positive especially in view
of its application in-the-large, catering to the needs of a wide audience
of citizens and generic users.

4.2. UC-B: ASKE for general subjects
In Fig. 7, we show another portion of the ACG returned by ASKE
that can be useful for UC-B. In this use case, the seed utilized to trigger
the ASKE extraction process includes simple keywords like imitation,
bag, distinctive elements. The selection of these keywords reproduces
the background of a generic user who is interested in understanding
the circumstances in which a bag can be considered a counterfeit of
another, without specialized legal knowledge and not familiar with
legal terminology and specific sentence formulation typical of case law
on the matter.
In this case, we note that the nodes in the graph represent more
general concepts, not necessarily related to the legal field. By using a
generic term like borsa (bag) combined with words that are closer to
legal terminology such as imitazione (imitation) and elementi distintivi
(distinctive elements), the resulting ACG is characterized by two different branches whose concepts express different meanings. In Italian,
the term borsa is polysemous and it can refer to a container used for
carrying money and small personal items or accessories (the English
word ‘‘bag’’) or to an exchange where security trading is conducted by
professional stockbrokers (the English expression ‘‘stock exchange’’). It
is worth noting that ASKE distinguishes these two meanings of ‘‘borsa’’
from the initial generations by creating two different concepts (bag
and stock exchange in Fig. 7) which are both labeled borsa in the
Italian graph. Furthermore, ASKE is capable to properly classify the
document chunks according to the pertinent concept meaning between
the two available. As an example, below we show two document chunks
associated with the concepts bag and stock exchange, respectively:

5. Related work
Work related to the issues discussed in this paper is about Legal
Information Retrieval (LIR) approaches based on knowledge extraction
and NLP techniques. LIR is the discipline that aims at extracting information from a corpus of legal documents, including case law decisions
and legal codes, with the goal of supporting effective retrieval by legal
practitioners and legal users to identify useful information for their
job and needs. A very first system using text analysis techniques to
overcome basic boolean search [23] in the legal domain has been
proposed in [24], where a document representative was automatically
extracted from text, containing index information necessary and sufficient to match the document with a query posed by a legal user. With
the recent progress of digital transformation, increasing interest and
efforts have been devoted to the development of advanced, AI-based
LIR approaches to process huge volumes of legal digital documents and
extract knowledge from them. In [25], an approach to assist legal professionals in comparing relevant precedents is presented; the approach
extracts and classifies sentences in breach of contract court decisions
according to predefined sentence types. A main obstacle encountered
when analyzing legal documents is the lack of sufficient annotated
data, especially in languages different from English; this aspect is crucial given the requirements of modern neural network-based language
models. For example, in [26], a method for similarity case retrieval
based on the legal facts is proposed, whose model combines topic
distribution and legal entity facts to make the document representation
vector more suitable for legal scenarios, with focus on text similarity

As noted in the aforementioned judgment No. 5443/2017, ‘‘in the
present case, such reproduction also applies to details such as, for
example, the slightly rounded flap situated between the two handles and
covering part of the zip fastener which, if they constitute an integral
part of the shape of the bag model, nevertheless also appear to be
elements in themselves capable of impressing themselves on the mind
of the consumer who will be able to distinguish between products even
legitimately having similar shapes, the one attributable to the source of
production constituted by the present plaintiffs’’.
Therefore, S.’s clients who intend to make investments of a financial
nature first enter into a so-called ’placement contract’ with S. itself,
and then enter into the actual contracts relating to their investment
(subscription of units of mutual investment funds, or shares in SICAVs,
or conclusion of an insurance policy, or conclusion of a portfolio management contract) directly with the ’product companies’ contracted with
the plaintiff.
11

S. Castano et al.

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105903

6. Concluding remarks

problem for Chinese. In [27], information extraction approach for
named entity recognition has been presented, with focus on German
legal documents. Other approaches to information extraction exploit
external resources, such as ontologies combined with NLP techniques
such as [28], where a tool for semantic analysis and annotation of
legal documents is presented, based on an ontology of deontic concepts.
In [29], an approach combining linguistic information provided by
WordNet together with NLP techniques is proposed for the extraction
of rules from legal documents, while [30] aims at extracting legal rules
using hierarchical recurrent neural networks. The increasing interest
towards the application of artificial intelligence techniques to the legal
field brought to the proposal of several competitions related to the
analysis of legal documents and related datasets. The most relevant
for the purpose of this paper is the COLIEE [31] competition, where
tasks for legal information extraction from case law and statute law
are proposed.
Despite the increasing interest about the application of artificial
intelligence techniques to the legal field, there is still a need for
approaches suitable to deal with unlabeled datasets. For this reason,
one of the topic of interest for our work has been the zero-shot learning
(ZSL) approach. ZSL is a problem setup in the field of machine learning,
where a classifier is required to predict labels of examples extracted
from classes that were never observed in the training phase. First
referred to as dataless classification in 2008 [32], ZSL has quickly
become a subject of interest in the field of NLP. The great advantage of
this approach consists in the resulting classifier being able to operate
efficiently in a partially or totally unlabeled environment. It is possible
to categorize ZSL techniques according to three different criteria, as
explained in [33]: the learning setting, the semantic space and the
method. Firstly, ZSL can be applied on a completely unlabeled dataset,
as in the original paper [32], or on a partially labeled one, like
in [34]; with this last approach, called generalized ZSL, the goal of the
classifier shifts to distinguishing between observation from already seen
classes, and examples from unseen ones. Secondly, one may discern
an engineered semantic space from a learned semantic space: the
former is designed by humans and can be constructed upon a set of
attributes [35] or a collection of keywords [36], while the latter is
built on top of the results of a machine learning model, as in the
case of a text-embedding space [37]. Finally, ZSL methods can be
divided in instance-based [38], whose focus is on obtaining examples
for unseen classes, and classifier-based [39], which instead focus on
directly building a classifier for unlabeled instances. With respect to the
above solutions, the proposed ASKE approach enforces legal knowledge
extraction in an unsupervised environment by operating in a textembedding space, therefore eliminating the need for annotated data.
The employed ZSL instance-based method goes under the category of
projection methods, which consists in labeling instances (i.e. document
chunks and terms in ASKE) by collocating these examples in the same
semantic space with class prototypes (i.e., ASKE concepts).
A key component in ASKE is Sentence-BERT [12], a modification of
BERT language model [40] that is specifically aimed at representing
sentence meaning in a vector space. In the legal domain, LEGALBERT, a version of BERT pre-trained on legal corpora [9], has been
proposed for the English language, and Italian Legal BERT [41] is under
evaluation for the Italian language. Another proposal for Italian legal
documents is LamBERTa [42], with a focus on law article retrieval.
However, we eventually decided to adopt Sentence-BERT because it
has been trained in such a way to ensure consistent representation
of the meaning of entire sentences, which was a major requirement
in designing ASKE and for dealing with legal language complexity.
Indeed, appropriate sentence meaning representation is crucial for the
quality of document chunk classification with ASKE concepts and for
term sense disambiguation in the concept extraction process. With the
consolidation of models that combine consistent sentence representation with in-domain pre-training, an extended version of ASKE based
on them could be evaluated.

In the paper, we presented the ASKE approach to legal knowledge extraction, which is based on a combination of context-aware
embedding models and zero-shot learning techniques. A featuring contribution of ASKE is the three-phase extraction cycle, which is executed
a number of times (called generations) starting from even a poorly
described seed concept to progressively extract new concepts which
(i) are representative of the different meanings of the terminology
used in legal document chunks and (ii) are used for fine-grained,
multi-label classification of legal documents at the chunk level without
relying on any document annotation. Another contribution is related
to the definition of the ASKE knowledge model, by formalizing entities
and relationships featuring the ACG initial population and subsequent
evolution according to the progress of the extraction process. According
to the obtained experimental results, we note that ASKE mostly outperforms a considered baseline (i.e., BERTopic), and it has comparable
performance with respect to the other considered baseline (i.e., ZeroShot TM). However, as a difference from Zero-Shot TM, it is worth
noting that ASKE does not require to predefine the number of target
topics to discover. Thus, ASKE results are particularly appropriate to
satisfy exploratory information needs in those situations where a priori
knowledge about the corpus is not available.
A further contribution of this work is related to the synergic collaboration within an interdisciplinary research team that involves experts
from legal, linguistic, data science, and computer science fields. This
multiplicity of expertise and background has been fundamental for
results validation and tuning purposes. The evaluation feedback of
ASKE results from legal and linguistic experts has been important for a
semantic analysis of extracted concepts. Furthermore, it has been taken
into account for ASKE setup and tuning, to define suitable configurations of the ASKE hyperparameters and to set the number of generations
for a document corpus.
Ongoing and future work is in two main directions. First, we are
working on further tuning the ASKE model to take into account the
specificity of the Italian legal domain. Moreover, the development of
a suite of application tools based on ASKE is currently in progress.
On one side, the ASKE components for knowledge extraction are being
integrated in a service-oriented infrastructure for Italian digital justice.
In this context, the ASKE concept graph can be employed by citizens
and general subjects for concept-based query answering on a given corpus
of legal documents like judgments and sentences. Here, we assume that
ASKE is triggered on a set of seeds predefined on main legal subject areas (e.g., banking, family, corporate law) according to the composition
of the underlying corpus [43]. On the other side, ASKE can be employed
as a support service to enforce legal document building, where a new case
law document for a target case at hand can be composed starting from
the most similar and prominent document chunks retrieved by ASKE.
For example, by working with the document builder interface, a legal
practitioner enters the specific background and the specific claims of
the parties (in the form of a query seed). ASKE retrieves the document
chunks describing decisions and related motivations extracted from
similar precedents, to be used for the composition of the motivations
and decision section of the case law document at hand [44].
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Silvana Castano: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - Review & Editing. Alfio Ferrara: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - Review & Editing. Emanuela Furiosi: Cooperated in drafting the
Introduction and Section 4 and she is the sole authoress of Section
4.2. Stefano Montanelli: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing Review & Editing. Sergio Picascia: Conceptualization, Methodology,
Writing - Original Draft, Software, Validation. Davide Riva: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - Original Draft, Software, Validation. Carolina Stefanetti: Cooperated in drafting the Introduction and
Section 4 and she is the sole authoress of Section 4.1.
12

S. Castano et al.

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105903

Declaration of competing interest

[17] Song Y, Zhao J, Specia L. SentSim: Crosslingual semantic evaluation of machine
translation. In: Proceedings of the 2021 conference of the North American
chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human language technologies. Association for Computational Linguistics; 2021, p. 3143–56. http://dx.
doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.252, Online. URL https://aclanthology.
org/2021.naacl-main.252.

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

[18] Role F, Morbieu S, Nadif M. Unsupervised evaluation of text co-clustering
algorithms using neural word embeddings. In: Proceedings of the 27th ACM
international conference on information and knowledge management. New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery; 2018, p. 1827–30. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1145/3269206.3269282.

Data availability
The authors do not have permission to share data.

[19] Bojanowski P, Grave E, Joulin A, Mikolov T. Enriching word vectors with
subword information. Trans Assoc Comput Linguist 2017;5:135–46. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00051, arXiv:https://direct.mit.edu/tacl/article-pdf/doi/
10.1162/tacl_a_00051/1567442/tacl_a_00051.pdf.

Acknowledgments
This work is partially supported by the Next Generation UPP project
within the PON programme of the Italian Ministry of Justice and by
project SERICS (PE00000014) under the MUR NRRP funded by the EU
- NextGenerationEU.

[20] Grootendorst M. BERTopic: Neural topic modeling with a class-based TF-IDF
procedure. 2022, arXiv:2203.05794.
[21] Bianchi F, Terragni S, Hovy D, Nozza D, Fersini E. Cross-lingual contextualized
topic models with zero-shot learning. In: Proceedings of the 16th conference
of the European chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main
volume. Association for Computational Linguistics; 2021, p. 1676–83. http://
dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.eacl-main.143, Online. URL https://aclanthology.
org/2021.eacl-main.143.

References
[1] Surden H. Artificial intelligence and law: An overview. Ga State Univ Law Rev
2019;35:19–22, URL https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411869.
[2] Waldron J. Stare decisis and the rule of law: A layered approach. L Rev
2012;1(11).
[3] Tomasino R. Il valore del precedente: un’analisi critica. 2023, https://www.
associazionemagistrati.it/media/79559/08_Tomasino.pdf. [Accessed 2023].
[4] Montrose J. Distinguishing cases and the limits of ratio decidendi. Mod Law Rev
1956;19(5):525–30.
[5] Galetta D-U, Pinotti G. Automation and algorithmic decision-making systems in the Italian Public Administration. CERIDAP 2023. http://dx.doi.
org/10.13130/2723-9195/2023-1-7, URL https://ceridap.eu/automation-andalgorithmic-decision-making-systems-in-the-italian-public-administration/.
[6] Schneider J-P, Enderlein F. Automated decision-making systems in German administrative law. CERIDAP 2023. http://dx.doi.org/10.13130/2723-9195/20231-102, URL https://ceridap.eu/automated-decision-making-systems-in-germanadministrative-law/.
[7] Gamero Casado E. Automated decision-making systems in Spanish administrative law. CERIDAP 2023. http://dx.doi.org/10.13130/2723-9195/20231-119, URL https://ceridap.eu/automated-decision-making-systems-in-spanishadministrative-law/.
[8] Reichel J. Regulating automation of Swedish Public Administration. CERIDAP
2023. http://dx.doi.org/10.13130/2723-9195/2023-1-112, URL https://ceridap.
eu/regulating-automation-of-swedish-public-administration/.
[9] Chalkidis I, Fergadiotis M, Malakasiotis P, Aletras N, Androutsopoulos I. LEGALBERT: The Muppets straight out of Law School. In: Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020. Association for Computational
Linguistics; 2020, p. 2898–904. http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.findingsemnlp.261, Online. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.261.
[10] Baron JR, Lewis DD, Oard DW. TREC 2006 legal track overview. In:
Voorhees EM, Buckland LP, editors. Proceedings of the 15th text REtrieval conference. NIST special publication, vol. 500–272, National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST); 2006, URL http://trec.nist.gov/pubs/trec15/papers/
LEGAL06.OVERVIEW.pdf.
[11] Bhattacharya P, Ghosh K, Ghosh S, Pal A, Mehta P, Bhattacharya A, et al.
FIRE 2019 AILA track: Artificial intelligence for legal assistance. In: Proceedings
of the 11th annual meeting of the forum for information retrieval evaluation.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery; 2019, p. 4–6. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1145/3368567.3368587.
[12] Reimers N, Gurevych I. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using siamese
BERT-networks. 2019, arXiv:1908.10084.
[13] Frey BJ, Dueck D. Clustering by passing messages between data points. Science 2007;315(5814):972–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1136800, arXiv:
https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.1136800, URL https://www.
science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.1136800.
[14] Chalkidis I, Fergadiotis E, Malakasiotis P, Androutsopoulos I. Large-scale multilabel text classification on EU legislation. In: Proceedings of the 57th annual
meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Florence, Italy: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2019, p. 6314–22. http://dx.doi.org/10.
18653/v1/P19-1636, URL https://aclanthology.org/P19-1636.
[15] Lo C-k. MEANT 2.0: Accurate semantic MT evaluation for any output language.
In: Proceedings of the 2nd conference on machine translation. Copenhagen,
Denmark: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2017, p. 589–97. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/W17-4767, URL https://aclanthology.org/W17-4767.
[16] Lo C-k. YiSi - a unified semantic MT quality evaluation and estimation metric
for languages with different levels of available resources. In: Proceedings of the
4th conference on machine translation (Volume 2: Shared task papers, Day 1).
Florence, Italy: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2019, p. 507–13. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/W19-5358, URL https://aclanthology.org/W19-5358.

[22] Bond F, Paik K. A survey of wordnets and their licenses. In: Proceedings of the
6th global WordNet conference. 2012, p. 64–71.
[23] Blair DC, Maron ME. An evaluation of retrieval effectiveness for a full-text
document-retrieval system. Commun ACM 1985;28(3):289–99. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/3166.3197.
[24] Gelbart D, Smith JC. Beyond Boolean search: FLEXICON, a legal tex-based
intelligent system. In: Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on artificial
intelligence and law. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery;
1991, p. 225–34. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/112646.112674.
[25] Mok WY, Mok JR. Legal machine-learning analysis: First steps towards A.I.
assisted legal research. In: Proceedings of the 17th international conference on
artificial intelligence and law. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery; 2019, p. 266–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3322640.3326737.
[26] Hu W, Zhao S, Zhao Q, Sun H, Hu X, Guo R, et al. BERT_LF: A similar case retrieval method based on legal facts. Wirel Commun Mob Comput 2022;2022:1–9.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2022/2511147.
[27] Leitner E, Rehm G, Moreno-Schneider J. Fine-grained named entity recognition
in legal documents. In: Acosta M, Cudré-Mauroux P, Maleshkova M, Pellegrini T,
Sack H, Sure-Vetter Y, editors. Semantic systems. The power of AI and knowledge
graphs. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2019, p. 272–87.
[28] Zeni N, Kiyavitskaya N, Mich L, Cordy JR, Mylopoulos J. Gaiust: supporting
the extraction of rights and obligations for regulatory compliance. Requir Eng
2015;20(1):1–22. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00766-013-0181-8.
[29] Dragoni M, Villata S, Rizzi W, Governatori G. Combining NLP approaches for
rule extraction from legal documents. In: 1st workshop on MIning and REasoning
with legal texts. 2016.
[30] Chalkidis I, Androutsopoulos I, Michos A. Obligation and prohibition extraction
using hierarchical RNNs. In: Proceedings of the 56th annual meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short papers). Melbourne,
Australia: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2018, p. 254–9. http://dx.
doi.org/10.18653/v1/P18-2041, URL https://aclanthology.org/P18-2041.
[31] Rabelo J, Goebel R, Kim M-Y, Kano Y, Yoshioka M, Satoh K. Overview and discussion of the competition on legal information extraction/entailment (COLIEE)
2021. Rev Socionetwork Strateg 2022;16(1):111–33. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s12626-022-00105-, URL https://ideas.repec.org/a/spr/trosos/v16y2022i1d10.
1007_s12626-022-00105-z.html.
[32] Chang M-W, Ratinov L, Roth D, Srikumar V. Importance of semantic representation: Dataless classification. In: Proceedings of the 23rd national conference on
artificial intelligence - Volume 2. AAAI Press; 2008, p. 830–5.
[33] Wang W, Zheng VW, Yu H, Miao C. A survey of zero-shot learning: Settings,
methods, and applications. ACM Trans Intell Syst Technol 2019;10(2). http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1145/3293318.
[34] Xian Y, Lampert CH, Schiele B, Akata Z. Zero-shot learning—A comprehensive
evaluation of the good, the bad and the ugly. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach
Intell 2019;41(09):2251–65. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2857768.
[35] Lampert CH, Nickisch H, Harmeling S. Learning to detect unseen object classes
by between-class attribute transfer. In: 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition. 2009, p. 951–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2009.
5206594.
[36] Qiao R, Liu L, Shen C, Hengel AVD. Less is more: Zero-shot learning from
online textual documents with noise suppression. In: 2016 IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition. Los Alamitos, CA, USA: IEEE
Computer Society; 2016, p. 2249–57. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.247,
URL https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.247.
13

S. Castano et al.

Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of Technology Law and Practice 52 (2024) 105903

[39] Frome A, Corrado GS, Shlens J, Bengio S, Dean J, Ranzato MA, et al. DeViSE:
A deep visual-semantic embedding model. In: Burges C, Bottou L, Welling M,
Ghahramani Z, Weinberger K, editors. Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 26. Curran Associates, Inc.; 2013, URL https://proceedings.neurips.
cc/paper_files/paper/2013/file/7cce53cf90577442771720a370c3c723-Paper.pdf.
[40] Devlin J, Chang M-W, Lee K, Toutanova K. BERT: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. 2019, arXiv:1810.04805.
[41] Licari D, Comandé G. ITALIAN-LEGAL-BERT: A pre-trained transformer language
model for Italian law. In: Companion proceedings of the 23rd international
conference on knowledge engineering and knowledge management. 2022, URL
https://ceur-ws.org/Vol-3256/km4law3.pdf.
[42] Tagarelli A, Simeri A. Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre-trained
language representation models with application to the Italian civil code. Artif
Intell Law 2021;30(3):417–73. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10506-021-09301-8.
[43] Bellandi V, Castano S, Montanelli S, Riva D, Siccardi S. A service infrastructure
for the Italian digital justice. In: Proc. of the 15th int. conference on management
of digital EcoSystems. 2023.
[44] Castano S, Ferrara A, Montanelli S, Picascia S, Riva D. A knowledge-based service
architecture for legal document building. In: Proc. of the 2nd int. workshop on
knowledge management and process mining for law. 2023.

[37] Xian Y, Akata Z, Sharma G, Nguyen Q, Hein M, Schiele B. Latent embeddings for
zero-shot classification. In: 2016 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition. Los Alamitos, CA, USA: IEEE Computer Society; 2016, p. 69–77.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.15, URL https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.
org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.15.
[38] Xu X, Hospedales T, Gong S. Transductive zero-shot action recognition by
word-vector embedding. Int J Comput Vis 2017;123(3):309–33.

14

