Information Processing and Management 62 (2025) 104054

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Information Processing and Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/infoproman

A novel large-language-model-driven framework for named
entity recognition
Zhenhua Wang a,b , Huiru Chen b, Guang Xu a , Ming Ren a,*
a
b

School of Information Resource Management, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, PR China
School of Computing, National University of Singapore 117417, Singapore

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Large language model
Named entity recognition
In-context learning
Contrastive learning
Knowledge graph

Named entity recognition (NER) stands as the foundational pillar of knowledge graphs across
multiple domains. Despite progress in NER using large language models (LLMs), challenges
persist regarding the selection of LLMs, the retrieval of demonstrations, and the design of
prompts. We introduce a novel framework for NER, termed LLMCC, which elucidates the syn­
ergistic interactions between different LLMs. Two new methods, SemnRank and InforLawthought, are proposed to address the issue of redundancy in demonstrations and to elevate
prompt quality for boosting LLM’s capabilities. Furthermore, LLMCC is trained through a new
entity-aware contrastive learning. Extensive experiments across five domains confirm the
competitiveness of LLMCC (surpassing ten recent studies by a margin of over 5% in F1 score), as
well as the effectiveness of SemnRank and InforLaw-thought. We uncover a series of insights
regarding information laws, prompting strategies, demonstration selections, and training designs.
This research significantly advances the incorporation of LLMs into the construction of knowledge
graphs.

1. Introduction
Named entity recognition (NER) plays an indispensable role in the construction and enhancement of knowledge graphs (KGs) and
artificial intelligence (AI). Central to its mission is the identification and extraction of entities such as personal names, product titles,
and machinery-embedded terms within textual data, thereby facilitating the extraction of valuable insights from vast, interconnected
networks, digital repositories, technical documents, and other information sources. By transforming unstructured text into structured
knowledge representations, NER enables the construction, expansion, and continuous updating of KGs, which, in turn, support
reasoning and predictive analytics across a wide range of downstream applications (Dong, 2023; Fan & Chen, 2024; Gao et al., 2024;
Wang et al., 2022a; Wang et al., 2022b; Wang et al., 2023d; Wang et al., 2024a).
Research efforts to improve NER performance have been extensive and ongoing. Initially, NER relies on manually crafted syntactic
and semantic rules created by domain experts. Subsequently, NER hasshifted towards deep learning-based methods, which auto­
matically capture latent features within text, leading to substantial improvements in NER. Recently, the advent of large language
models (LLMs) such as GPT-4 has injected new momentum into KGs. LLMs, with their advanced text comprehension, have further
enhanced NER capabilities through in-context learning (ICL). For instance, Polak & Morgan (2024) introduce the ChatExtract method,
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: wangzhenhua@u.nus.edu (Z. Wang), huiru.chen@u.nus.edu (H. Chen), 2020000919@ruc.edu.cn (G. Xu), renm@ruc.edu.cn
(M. Ren).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2024.104054
Received 31 July 2024; Received in revised form 8 November 2024; Accepted 18 December 2024
Available online 30 December 2024
0306-4573/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

Information Processing and Management 62 (2025) 104054

Z. Wang et al.

which extracts scientific entities from academic papers through ChatGPT and ICL; Dagdelen et al. (2024) leverage GPT-3 to extract
materials and equipment-related entities from chemical texts; and Wang et al. (2023b) develop GPT-NER, which employs various types
of prompts to enable GPT-3 to perform NER across different domains; etc. (Kan et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2024; Gao
et al., 2024; Keloth et al., 2024).
Despite these advancements, several concerns remain. Firstly, generative LLMs such as OpenAI’s GPT-4, primarily built on
Transformer decoders and trained autoregressively, are inherently aligned with text generation patterns (Achiam et al., 2023).
However, NER necessitates context-sensitive sequence understanding, which may not be optimally addressed by directly employing
these decoder-based LLMs (DLLMs). While fine-tuning DLLMs can align them more closely with NER, such adjustment often comes at
the cost of their generality (Qi et al., 2023).
Secondly, ICL, which includes prompt engineering techniques such as Chain-of-Thought (Kocoń et al., 2023; Triguero et al., 2024),
can substantially harness the powerful reasoning capabilities of DLLMs. However, its effectiveness heavily depends on the quality and
variety of the demonstrations provided (Wang et al., 2023b). Current methods still exhibit limitations; for example, GPT-NER selects
demonstrations from the training set that are semantically closest to the test set, but overlooks the issue of meaning redundancy among
demonstrations. This redundancy restricts performance improvements, as, ideally, demonstrations should expose DLLMs to diverse
contexts. When multiple demonstrations convey essentially the same information, they fail to provide DLLMs with new insights,
instead offering redundant knowledge that could have been communicated in a single demonstration. This redundancy reduces the
overall amount of useful information DLLMs can learn, thereby diminishing its effectiveness.
Thirdly, existing research has not yet fully explored how ICL prompts can more effectively guide DLLMs to comprehend given texts.
A deeper understanding of the text by DLLMs could lead to more effective sequence-related processing, which remains an area ripe for
exploration.
To address the first challenge, we propose to harness the strengths of both encoder-based LLMs (ELLMs) and DLLMs for NER.
ELLMs, such as Microsoft’s DeBERTa-v2, may have fewer parameters relative to DLLMs, but their architecture - centered around
Transformer encoders trained with masked language modeling, makes them inherently more suitable for NER. Specifically, we propose
two complementary strategies. (a) We use DLLMs to extend the training dataset for ELLMs. Based on the original input, DLLMs can
generate additional contextually-rich text, and potentially introduce new knowledge and insights that are inherent to DLLMs, which is
beneficial for the training of ELLMs (Kocoń et al., 2023). (b) We combine the predictions from DLLMs and ELLMs to capitalize their
respective strength. By doing so, we can leverage the context sensitivity of ELLMs and the inferential prowess of DLLMs, allowing them
to contribute distinctively to the NER process.
For the second challenge, our focus is to ensure that demonstrations are not only semantically relevant but also free from
redundancy in meaning. To ascertain semantic relevance, we employ the commonly-used and effective method of embedding simi­
larity, with the embeddings being generated by ELLMs. To address redundancy, a straightforward approach is to evaluate potential
information overlap from the perspective of textual entailment. Inspired by the DLLMs’ adeptness at managing meaning relationships
(Farquhar et al., 2024), we leverage DLLMs to ascertain whether there is an entailment - meaning consistency - between demon­
strations. Building on this, we introduce a new demonstration retriever, SemnRank, which integrates ELLM-based semantic compu­
tations with DLLM-based bidirectional meaning entailment detection.
To tackle the third challenge, we draw on insights from information laws, which delineate deterministic patterns between the
macro-structure of text (the text itself) and its micro-components, such as words and characters. These laws provide a more funda­
mental understanding of the textual system (Stanisz et al., 2024). This framework is particularly enlightening across both natural and
social sciences, such as Zipf’s law. This law encapsulates the principle of least effort in information transmission, manifesting as a
quantifiable phenomenon where word frequency is inversely proportional to its ranking (DeMarzo et al., 2021). Therefore, we propose
a new prompting method, InforLaw-thought, which leverages information laws to guide DLLMs in processing a given text. By modeling
the text through the lens of information laws, DLLMs can gain a better understanding of the content.
Formally, we propose a novel framework for NER called LLMCC, which integrates ICL (with SemnRank, InforLaw-thought), and
cross-interactions between DLLMs and ELLMs. Moreover, to enhance the robustness of LLMCC, especially in mitigating potential errors
that may arise during the generation process of DLLMs, we introduce a new training method called entity-aware Contrastive learning
(EACL). Extensive experiments conducted across five domains (Entertainment, Energy, Ecommerce, Chemical, News) demonstrate the
competitiveness of LLMCC, surpassing recent studies. Furthermore, SemnRank has proven superior, outperforming common-used
methods like KNN-semantics. Likewise, InforLaw-thought has demonstrated its progressive advantage, surpassing recent methods
like Tree-of-Thought1.
This study advances NER by integrating LLM with knowledge graphs, making contributions on multiple fronts. First, the LLMCC
framework sets a successful paradigm for NER development in the LLM era. In addition, SemnRank, InforLaw-thought, and EACL
provide valuable inspiration for future research, shedding light on how NER can be better developed and refined. Second, we extend
the information laws to DLLMs and demonstrate their potential to improve NER. Notably, we find that Zipf’s law yields the most
significant benefits, followed by Heaps’ law. Furthermore, we explore how different information laws activate distinct reasoning
processes within DLLMs, thus broadening the application of information laws and providing new interdisciplinary perspectives. Third,
we establish synergistic interactions between DLLMs and ELLMs, offering actionable implications for future research. For instance, we
observe that while NER performance improves with the increase of the number of demonstrations, the marginal gain gradually

1

https://github.com/wzh-ins/LLM_NER
2

Information Processing and Management 62 (2025) 104054

Z. Wang et al.

decreases. Additionally, we show that DLLMs can serve as an assistant for ELLM predictions. Last, we discover that simply incorpo­
rating prompts like “analyze the text using Zipf’s law” into popular reasoning frameworks, such as Chain-of-Thought, can boost NER
performance, which opens up new possibilities for ICL.
2. Related work
2.1. Knowledge graph and named entity recognition
KGs are structured representations of knowledge in which entities are depicted as nodes, forming a semantic framework that allows
machines to understand and infer information about the real world. At the core of KGs lies NER, a crucial process that involves the
identification and classification of key textual elements—referred to as named entities—including names of people, organizations, and
other significant terms. The primary objective of NER is to locate these entities and categorize them into predefined classes, thereby
transforming unstructured text into structured data. NER serves as a crucial driver for the development and refinement of KGs. For
instance, in the construction of KGs, NER directly facilitates their initial assembly; in the expansion of KGs, as new data emerges, NER
can identify previously unrecognized entities, ensuring that the KG remains current and comprehensive; and in the updating of KGs, it
can address changes in entities such as organizational restructurings, name alterations, or new affiliations (Dong, 2023; Fan & Chen,
2024; Gao et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2022a; Wang et al., 2022b; Wang et al., 2023a).
The emergence of LLMs has recently breathed new life into NER by leveraging their powerful text generation capabilities, which
often goes beyond the confines of traditional deep learning approaches. Extensive research has been conducted across various domains
to explore this potential. For example, the ChatExtract method extracts entities from academic papers using a set of engineering
prompts in ChatGPT, where the prompts not only locate relevant sentences but also validate the extracted data through follow-up
questions (Polak & Morgan, 2024). The SpiralPrompt method applies a spiral "prompt engineering" process to extract entities from
medical text notes by submitting batch queries to ChatGPT via OpenAI’s API (Huang et al., 2024). In chemistry, GPT-3 helps extract
entities related to materials and devices by incorporating formatted extractive summaries within prompts (Dagdelen et al., 2024).
Additionally, the GPT-NER method improves GPT-3′s in-context learning by using K-nearest neighbors (KNN) to retrieve demon­
strations from the training set and adding self-verification prompts to minimize errors during generation (Wang et al., 2023b). The
performance of GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 in clinical NER is assessed, resulting in the development of a task-specific prompt framework called
HuPrompt, which includes task descriptions, annotation guidelines, and error-analysis-based prompts (Hu et al., 2024).
Instruction-based learning is applied to LLaMA-7B to develop BioNER-LLaMA, which simplifies biomedical NER training and evalu­
ation by automatically reusing existing datasets (Keloth et al., 2024). Similarly, the CPGF method reframes NER using prompt learning
by training a T5 model on prompts designed to fill predefined slots, thereby enhancing entity recognition tasks (Kan et al., 2023).
Lastly, a Knowledge-injected Actionable Information Extraction Model (KAIEM), based on BERT-Large, is introduced to extract
actionable information from crisis-related tweets in few-shot and zero-shot settings, with the model automatically constructing a label
word space for utterances using word embeddings (Gao et al., 2024a).
However, there are concerns regarding the application of generative LLMs. These models, primarily based on Transformer decoders
and trained autoregressively, align naturally with text generation, which does not fully match the needs of NER, a task that requires
context-sensitive sequence tagging (Achiam et al., 2023).
2.2. Large language model and in-context learning
Recently, the development of decoder-based LLMs (DLLMs), such as OpenAI’s GPT-4, has seen an unstoppable surge in interest due
to their impressive performance across various NLP tasks (Achiam et al., 2023). Additionally, the remarkable ability of DLLMs to follow
instructions has captivated both the academic community and the general public. Given the extensive computational resources
required, fine-tuning DLLMs is often impractical; moreover, such fine-tuning could significantly impair their inherent generality (Qi
et al., 2023). Currently, a more prevalent approach involves the design of prompts to accomplish specific tasks (Kocoń et al., 2023).
When provided with demonstrations, the output from DLLMs becomes more controllable—this is known as in-context learning (ICL), a
novel learning paradigm that does not require any parameter updates. However, the performance of ICL is influenced by several
factors, including the selection of demonstrations and the presentation of the prompt. Numerous studies have optimized ICL (Voronov
et al., 2024); for instance, in NER, Wang et al. (2023b) propose integrating k-nearest neighbors to retrieve demonstrations from a
training set to enhance the demonstrations. Nonetheless, they do not account for potential meaning redundancy between demon­
strations, which could limit the effectiveness of ICL.
Regarding the presentation of prompts, also known as prompt engineering (Kocoń et al., 2023; Triguero et al., 2024), a plethora of
techniques has emerged. One of them is the Role-playing, which involves assigning a specific role to DLLMs, such as "You are an NLP
expert." This method capitalizes on the anthropomorphic capabilities of DLLMs to simulate expertise, thereby enhancing user
engagement and the quality of interactions. To improve the reasoning of DLLMs, Touvron et al. (2023) introduce the Few-Shot-Prompt,
which uses example-based demonstrations within the prompt itself to better convey task requirements. This technique proves essential
in scenarios where mere direct instructions might fall short, providing the contextual clues necessary for DLLMs to produce more
accurate outputs. Building on the idea of structured interaction, Wei et al. (2022) develop the Chain-of-Thought (CoT). This method
decomposes complex tasks into simpler, sequential subtasks, making the reasoning process explicit and thereby enhancing the DLLM’s
problem-solving accuracy. Such structured thinking is crucial for tasks that involve deep cognitive processing. To further refine CoT,
Kojima et al. (2022) combine the Few-shot and CoT to form the Few-shot-CoT. By adding step-by-step guidance (such as "Let’s think
3

Information Processing and Management 62 (2025) 104054

Z. Wang et al.

step by step") directly within the prompts, this innovation aids DLLMs in navigating complex reasoning paths, ensuring clarity in task
execution. In a similar vein, Zhou et al. (2022) propose the Least-To-Most method, which organizes the resolution of problems by
progressively addressing smaller subproblems. This method facilitates a cumulative knowledge-building process, where each step
informs and refines the subsequent ones, thus aiding tasks that require an accumulation of insights. Complementing these de­
velopments, Yao et al. (2024) present the Tree-of-Thought, which expands on CoT by organizing thoughts into a tree structure. This
allows multiple reasoning pathways to be explored and integrated, supporting complex decision-making by providing a framework to
evaluate various intermediate choices. Simultaneously, Zhou et al. (2024) emphasize the importance of output reliability with their
Self-Consistency method. By generating multiple responses to the same prompt and selecting the most consistent one, this approach
uses repetition to enhance the precision and trustworthiness of the DLLM’s outputs. Also, Liu et al. (2021) introduce Generated
Knowledge Prompting, a technique that fosters a pseudo-collaborative environment between multiple DLLMs. By generating
domain-specific insights through demonstrations and using them to guide another DLLM’s decisions, this approach simulates
knowledge transfer between DLLMs, enriching their response capabilities.
While these methodologies have achieved commendable performance in reasoning tasks such as solving mathematical problems,
their effectiveness in entity extraction may still be insufficient.

Fig. 1. Architecture of LLMCC.
4

Information Processing and Management 62 (2025) 104054

Z. Wang et al.

3. Research objective
This paper aims to integrate DLLMs and ELLMs, capitalizing on their respective strengths in natural language generation and
understanding to enhance NER performance. Our research objectives are outlined as follows:
RO1: To propose a novel demonstration retriever capable of retrieving demonstrations that are semantically relevant and free from
redundant meanings.
RO2: To introduce a novel prompting strategy that encourages LLMs to delve deeper into the contextual fabric of the text.
RO3: To develop a new learning method that strengthens the training process for NER.
4. Methodology
The LLMCC framework synergizes DLLMs and ELLMs, as shown in Fig. 1. Since ELLMs are inherently context-sensitive, they are
naturally well-suited to NER’s base; to maximize their effectiveness, fine-tuning is essential. In general, the performance of an ELLM
improves with the size and richness of the training data. To this end, we design Module 1, which utilizes the powerful text generation
capabilities of an DLLM to extend the training data, that also incorporates additional insights and knowledge embedded in the DLLM
itself. To transform this extended text into data suitable for ELLMs, Module 2 is designed, which employs in-context learning (ICL) to
drive DLLM in generating an LLM-tagged set. This process involves two key components: demonstration retrieval and prompt con­
struction. To train the ELLM more effectively, Module 3 is developed, which implements a contrastive learning strategy based on both
the LLM-tagged set and the original training set. Finally, to mitigate potential prediction errors in the ELLM, Module 4 is designed,
which drives ICL-based (from Module 2) DLLM to correct ELLM predictions. The details of the four modules are as follows.
Module 1: Text Extension. We direct a DLLM to sequentially extend each sentence from the training set with the prompt such as "As
an expert in the [X] field, please extend the given text based on your understanding" for obtaining the extended corpus, Cextended , where [X]
aligns with the dataset’s context. We impose no length limit and allow DLLMs to freely apply the knowledge, which can avoid potential
hallucinations or erroneous outputs that may arise if the amount exceeds the corresponding knowledge base of DLLM (McIntosh et al.,
2023). This module leverages the very vast knowledge embedded in DLLMs to enrich the contextual depth and diversity of the training
set, thereby benefiting subsequent modules.
Module 2: Entity Tagging. It involves unsupervised annotation of entities within Cextended based on the DLLM, which serves the
subsequent model training. To better accomplish this complex task, we introduce a new in-context learning approach comprising two
parts: the demonstration retriever, SemnRank (details in Section 4.1), and the prompt constructor, InforLaw-thought (details in Section
)
(
)
(
4.2). SemnRank retrieves k demonstrations, Dk = f(x1 , y1 ), …, f xk , yk , where f xi , yi is a predefined function that transforms dem­
onstrations into natural language prompts; xi and yi are sentences and corresponding labels (in BIO format) from the training set. Based
on Dk and the task I, for the new input xk+1 from Cextended , InforLaw-thought guides a DLLM to produce the output yk+1 , resulting in the
LLM-tagged set.
LLM(I, f(x1 , y1 ), …, f(xk , yk ), f (xk+1 ,

))→yk+1

Module 3: Entity-aware contrastive learning. Based on the LLM-tagged set and training set, we implement a supervised learning
strategy for the training of the entity recognizer (an ELLM-based model). Recognizing the potential errors in Cextended and LLM-tagged
set, we treat LLM-tagged set as the reference rather than ground truth, and present a new contrastive learning framework (details in
Section 4.3).
Module 4: Entity Prediction Enhancement. It aims to assist and correct potential prediction errors or omissions of the entity
recognizer in Module 3, thereby achieving a more robust and reliable NER. During the prediction process, we guide a DLLM to verify
the outputs of the entity recognizer. The demonstrations are from SemnRank, and the designed prompt is derived from InforLawthought. For example: “Assume the role of an NLP expert with a deep understanding of entity tagging in BIO format, brought into a team
with three distinguished peers from your field. Your collective task is to verify the accuracy of BIO labels provided for the text [T] where the types
of entities include ... Begin by independently reviewing [T] through the information law (add information in Table 1), and its associated BIO
labels. Identify any inaccuracies or inconsistencies in the labeling. After your individual assessment, convene with your peers to discuss your
findings. Each of you will present the discrepancies you’ve discovered and propose corrections based on your expertise. Engage in a detailed
collaborative review, challenging each other’s assessments and refining the labels through collective insight. This iterative process of evaluation,
Table 1
Information laws. The parameters here are not shared with those in Section 4.1 & 4.3.
Law

Expression

Parameter definition

Main insight

Zipf’s law
Heaps’ law
Taylor’s law
Hilberg’s law
Ebeling’s law
Menzerath’s law
Benford’s law
Mandelbrot’s law

f(r)∝1/rs
V(N)∝Nβ
σ2 ∝μb
H(L)∝Lα
C(L)∝Ld
Φ(L)∝L− γ
P(d) = log10 (1 + 1 /d)
F(q, τ)∝LqH(q)

f(r): word frequency; r: rank
V(N): vocabulary size; N: corpus size
σ2: f(r) variance; μ: f(r) mean
H(L): entropy of text; L: word count
C(L): variability of text; L: character count
Φ(L): character length; L: word count
P(d): first digit frequency; d: first digit
F(q, τ): long-range correlation; L: text scales; q: order

Principle of least effort
Redundancy in language
Predictability of word usage
Redundancy of information volume
Density and randomness in information
Larger the whole, smaller the parts
Naturalness of information
Self-similarity of language

5

Information Processing and Management 62 (2025) 104054

Z. Wang et al.

debate, and adjustment continues until all of you agree on the correctness of every label. Conclude by documenting the final, consensus-driven
labels for [T], ensuring they accurately represent the entities as per your combined expert analysis.”
4.1. SemnRank
SemnRank aims to retrieve better demonstrations from the training set, addressing the issues of random selection or meaning
redundancy present in previous research. Considering that each demonstration is often presented in sentence form, we denote the
training set as S = {s1 ,s2 …,sn }, where each si is a sentence. The encoder E uses an ELLM to map si to a d-dimensional vector space via its
CLS embedding.
vi = E(si )
To find the top n sentences in the training set that are semantically closest to the sentence set T in the test set, we calculate the
frequently-used Euclidean distance between vi and the average embedding vT of T.
√̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
√ d
√∑
Sim(vi , vT ) = √
(vik − vT )2
k=1

The set of n nearest sentences is selected as candidate demonstration set D, where i1 , …, in are the indices of the sentences in S.
D = argmini1 ,…,in {si |Sim(vi , vT )}
It is important to note that there may be meaning redundancy between demonstrations, which can undermine the effectiveness of
in-context learning. To better illustrate this issue, we take two demonstrations (text part) from the chemical domain dataset as
examples:
Demonstration 1: “The solvent regeneration system consists of rich solution flashing tanks that increase pressure, causing the solvent
regeneration tower to overload and gas to enter the flare mainline.”
Demonstration 2: “The rich solution flashing tank’s liquid level rises, increasing pressure in the solvent regeneration tower, which can result
in gas entering the flare mainline.”
We can see that, both demonstrations convey nearly identical information, and the content they provide can have been commu­
nicated by a single demonstration. This redundancy limits the value of one of the demonstrations, as it fails to offer new or additional
context for the DLLM to learn from, thereby reducing the amount of useful information.
To address this issue, we present the detection of meaning entailment. We denote Imp(a, b) as a function of meaning entailment that
returns 1 if demonstration a implies the meaning of demonstration b, and 0 otherwise. We use a DLLM to launch the Imp(a, b) with
prompt like “Do the two sentences convey the same meaning? Only answer Yes or No”, since the DLLM-based approach has been
proven to be effective (Farquhar et al., 2024). Then we have:
Equiv(a, b) = Imp(a, b) × Imp(a, b)
The function Equiv(a, b) returns 1 if a and b are considered to have equivalent meanings, otherwise it returns 0. Thus, we can cluster
the demonstrations that convey equivalent meanings together, and define C = {c1 , c2 …, cm } as the set of all clusters where m is the
number of clusters. We assign each demonstration di to a cluster cj :
{
}
cj = di |∃dk ∈ cj : Equiv(di , dk ) = 1
For k-shot demonstration selection, if k ≤ m, for the highest similarity demonstration from each cluster, we select the top k:
({
} )
D1,…,k = Top

argminSim(vd , vT )|j = 1, 2, …, m , k
d∈cj

If k > m, initially, we retrieve the highest similarity demonstration from each cluster, and then proceed to select the second highest
until k demonstrations are retrieved:
{
}
({
}
)
D1,…,k =

argminSim(vd , vT )|j = 1, 2, …, m
d∈cj

∪ Top

argminSim(vd , vT )|j = 1, 2, …, m , k − m
d∈cj {dj }

4.2. InforLaw-thought
Information laws refer to the patterns between the text (macro-structure) and its micro-components (such as words and characters)
(Stanisz et al., 2024), which reflect human communication and thought processes, as human text serves as a channel to the mind,
intellect, and ideas. There are eight commonly-used information laws, as shown in Table 1 (Wang et al., 2024b), which reflect different
insights across different dimensions.
Modeling information laws requires examining the relationships between different constituent elements in the text, which to some
extent provides more contextual effects for DLLMs. Hence, InforLaw-thought is designed to allow information laws to better prompt
6

Information Processing and Management 62 (2025) 104054

Z. Wang et al.

DLLMs. In the first stage, due to the diversity of text types and lengths, not all laws hold uniformly. To this end, we propose a dynamic
law selector (DLS) to evaluate the characteristics of the given a text T, thus determining the applicability of information laws. Spe­
cifically, we have Information Law Pool (ILP), denote the set of M laws available for selection, here M = 8.
ILP = {L1 , L2 , …, LM }
From the T, we extract empirical data points Di =

)
}
{(
xij , yij |j = 1, 2, …, ni relevant to law Li , where, x and y are variables (such as

the scale variation, see Table 1 and the study (Wang et al., 2024b)), ni is the number of data points. We define the theoretical model
fLi (x; θi ), where θi represents the set of parameters for Li . Hence, we estimate θi by minimizing the sum of squared residuals:
θ∗i = argminθi

ni (
∑
(
))2
yij − fLi xij ; θi
j=1

We calculate the applicability metric for Li , such as the commonly-used coefficient of determination (R2 ):
(
))2
∑ ni (
∗
j=1 yij − fLi xij ; θi
2
Ri = 1 −
(
)2
∑ ni
∑ ni
1
j=1 yij − ni
j=1 yij
Generally, R2 ≥ 0.9 indicates that Li is applicable, and the larger R2 , the higher the applicability. Hence, we define the law selection
threshold R2threshold = 0.9, and construct the candidate set of applicable laws:
{
}
S = Li ∈ ILP|R2i ≥ R2threshold
}
{
If S ∕
= ∅, we determine S as the final selection; else, we select Li with the highest R2 , S = argmaxLi ∈ILP R2i ; which ensures that the
selected law is as closely aligned as possible with T.
In the next stage, we guide DLLMs to play the role of an NLP expert specializing in the field X, responsible for entity tagging (BIO
format) of given text. In addition, inspired by Generated Knowledge Prompting method (GKP), we guide DLLMs to invite three
renowned peers, and collaborate on the brainstorming. Note that although GKP uses other DLLMs, this significantly increases
computational resources. We prompt them to model and analyze T using S with information in Table 1. This process continues until the

Algorithm 1
Input: text T; dataset domain X; demonstration D
Parameter: DLLM; dynamic law selector DLS
Output: LLM-tagged set T’
1: T’ = Ø
2: S = DLS(T)
3: Prompt = {
You are an NLP expert in the [X] field, tasked with performing NER (in BIO format) on the given text. You have invited three renowned peers to collaborate in a
comprehensive analysis.
Model and analyze the text [T] using the information law(s) [S]:
**Instructions:**
1. **Collaborative Modeling:**
- Discuss and model the text using the provided information laws.
- Examine the relationships between text elements.
- Utilize the mathematical formulations of the laws to deepen your understanding.
2. **Independent Entity Identification:**
- Each expert independently identifies and categorizes entities within the text, labeling them in BIO format.
- Incorporate unique insights derived from the analysis.
3. **Peer Review and Refinement:**
- Share your findings with the group.
- Engage in critical discussion, challenging and validating each other’s results.
- Make necessary corrections and adjustments based on the feedback.
4. **Consensus Building:**
- Reach a consensus on the final entity tagging, ensuring accuracy and consistency.
- Document any important observations or insights from the discussion.
**Output Requirements:**
- Provide the final entity-tagged version of the text in BIO format.
- Include a brief summary of the key insights from your analysis and how the information laws informed your tagging decisions.
- Ensure clarity and adherence to BIO tagging conventions.
**The text [T]: …
**The information law(s) [S]: …
}
4: T’ = T’ ∪ DLLM(Prompt, D)
5: return T’

7

Information Processing and Management 62 (2025) 104054

Z. Wang et al.

peers jointly conclude indicating that they could have sufficiently understood T. On this basis, each peer independently identifies and
categorizes entities based on their understanding, adding unique insights. Subsequently, they engage in challenging and validating
each other’s views, making corrections, and adjusting their analyses until a consensus is reached on the identified entities.
We can obtain the LLM-tagged set, by combining InforLaw-thought with demonstrations (from SemnRank), as shown in Algorithm
1. For example, for the text: “From the high-temperature oil and gas from the reactor, which exchanges heat with the circulating gas
from the circulating gas compressor inside E-5,611,102″, the tag sequence is: “O B-MAT I-MAT I-MAT I-MAT O B-EQU, O B-MAT I-MAT
O B-EQU I-EQU I-EQU O B-EQU”, where “EQU” and “MAT” refer to the equipment and material.
Note that the training set and the LLM-tagged set are combined in Module 3 to train the entity recognizer. Although directly using
ELLMs is a common approach, in this paper, the two set are not identical. Hence, we introduce the entity-aware contrastive learning to
focus on different entities, which is detailed in Section 4.3.
4.3. Entity-aware contrastive learning
We detail the training of the entity recognizer based on the training set and LLM-tagged set, where the training goal is to assign each
token xi in a sequence X = {x1 , x2 , …, xK } to a predefined entity category yi ∈ Y or assign it as a non-entity yi = 0, where, Y represents
the set of entity categories, and K is the length of the token sequence. Note that the symbols here are not shared with those in Section
4.1 and 4.2.
We use an ELLM and a linear layer to construct the model architecture of entity recognizer, which is common and effective, where
the former encodes X into embeddings H(X), the latter predicts the categories, X is from the training set and LLM-tagged set. To
enhance the recognizer’s robustness and combat potential errors in LLM-tagged set, we propose a new entity-aware contrastive
learning to train the recognizer, with new positive and negative pairs, as follows.
(1) We present two types of positive pairs:
Human-tagged entity / Human-tagged entity: Given two embedding sequences H1 = {h11 , h12 , …, h1m } and H2 = {h21 , h22 , …, h2n }
both from the training set, we form a positive pair when both sequences contain the same entity category at corresponding positions k:
(h1k , h2k ) ∈ P+ , if ∃k ∈ [1, min(m, n)] : y1k = y2k ∕
=0
LLM-tagged entity / Human-tagged entity: For an embedding sequence H3 = {h31 , h32 , …, h3r } from LLM-tagged set and H1 from
the training set, we create a positive pair when they share the same entity category at k:
=0
(h3k , h1k ) ∈ P+ , if ∃k ∈ [1, min(r, n)] : y3k = y1k ∕
(2) We present two types of negative pairs:
Human-tagged entity / Human-tagged non-entity: For two sequences H1 and H2 from the training set, we design a negative pair
when one has an entity label and the other has a non-entity label at the same position:
(h1k , h2k ) ∈ P− , if ∃k ∈ [1, min(m, n)] : y1k ∕
= 0 & y2k = 0
}
{
LLM-tagged entity / LLM-tagged entity: For two sequences H3 and H4 = h41 , h42 , …, h4q from LLM-tagged set, we construct a
negative pair when they have different entity categories at the same position:
= y4k & y3k ∕
= 0 & y4k ∕
=0
(h3k , h4k ) ∈ P− , if ∃k ∈ [1, min(r, q)] : y3k ∕
On this basis, to complement this training, we design a new loss function, which includes three aspects:
Ltotal = LCE + Lcontrastive + Lcontext
(1) Cross-Entropy Loss LCE : It is commonly-used, and performs NER from the perspective of entity classification, where, C is the
number of entity categories; I{⋅} is the indicator function; zic is the logit output for category c.
(
)
∑
∑ C
1 K
exp (zic )
LCE = −
I{yi =c} log ∑C
( )
K i=1 c=1
j=1 exp zij
(2) Contrastive Loss Lcontrastive : It is designed to distinguish similar and dissimilar entity embeddings, where, d(h1 , h2 ) is the
Euclidean distance between the embeddings h1 and h2 ; hak , hpk , hnk are the normalized anchor embedding, positive embedding,
and negative embedding at position k; δ is the margin.
K
(
) ∑
)
)
(
(
Lcontrastive ha , hp , hn =
max 0, d hak , hpk − d(hak , hnk ) + δ
k=1

8

Information Processing and Management 62 (2025) 104054

Z. Wang et al.

(3) Contextual Continuity Loss Lcontext : Considering that entities may have different contexts in different sentences and sets, we
minimize the variance in embeddings between consecutive tokens that belong to the same entity. This would help the entity
recognizer learn that tokens within the same entity boundary should have similar contexts.
Lcontext =

K−
∑1
i=1

I{yi =yi+1 } ⋅ ‖ hi − hi+1 ‖22

5. Experiment
5.1. Dataset
We select five commonly-used datasets from different knowledge domains: News, Entertainment, Energy, Ecommerce, and
Chemical (Jehangir et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2021a; Wang et al., 2021b; Wang et al., 2022a; Wang et al., 2022b; Wang et al., 2023a;
Wang et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2024a, Zhang et al., 2024b), to support a comprehensive experiment evaluation. Detailed information
is provided in Table 2.
5.2. Baseline
Recent powerful NER studies are chosen as our baselines: GPT-NER: GPT-3′s in-context learning, incorporating the k-nearestneighbours method to retrieve demonstrations from a training set and adding self-verification prompts (Wang et al., 2023b).
BERT-Tagger: fine-tunes BERT on the training set (Devlin et al., 2019). MRC-NER: formulates NER as a machine reading compre­
hension (MRC) task and trains the MRC-NER model on the training set (Li et al., 2020). GNN-SL: fine-tunes RoBERTa on the training set
based on nearest examples via graph neural networks (Wang et al., 2023c). ACE-document-context: optimizes the controller to find
better concatenations of embeddings on the training set (Wang et al., 2021b). DeFFSi: trains neural networks based on Fourier Series
Multifractal Analysis and Sital activation function (Wang et al., 2024c). CPGF: prompts T5 models designed to fill slots within
pre-defined prompt types (Kan et al., 2023). HuPrompt: uses GPT-4 based on prompts with task descriptions, formatting rules,
annotation guidelines, and error analysis (Hu et al., 2024). ChatExtract: uses ChatGPT based on prompts that identify sentences
containing data and validate the data through follow-up questions (Polak & Morgan, 2024). SpiralPrompt: utilizes spiral prompt
engineering to process ChatGPT through batch queries (Huang et al., 2024).
To evaluate the competitiveness of InforLaw-thought, it is compared with recent popular prompting methods: Role-Playing
(Sinan, 2023); Few-Shot-Prompt (Touvron et al., 2023); Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al., 2022); Few-shot-CoT (Kojima et al., 2022);
Self-Consistency (Zhou et al., 2024); Least-to-Most (Zhou et al., 2022); Tree-of-Thought (Yao et al., 2024); Generated Knowledge
Prompting (Liu et al., 2021). See Section 2.2 for more information. All methods are provided with the same contextual background,
such as, "You are an expert of natural language processing in the field of [X], and you are performing NER task where the categories of
entities include ..."
In addition, for methods requiring demonstrations, we select k-shot from the training set, and they are consistent with InforLawthought. For Chain-of-Thought and related methods, such as Self-Consistency, a DLLM first identifies entities in the text and then
classifies them. In Few-shot-CoT, the "Let’s think step by step" is added at the beginning. In Self-Consistency, a DLLM performs NER
three rounds. Due to the large number of entities, it is not appropriate to select the most consistent output, so we take the union of the
three outputs as the final entities. In Least-to-Most, NER is decomposed into steps: a DLLM first identifies and classifies entities from the
text; then, based on the history information, the DLLM further provides the final entities. For Tree-of-Thought, we use the prompt
based on https://github.com/dave1010/tree-of-thought-prompting, adapting them for NER. In Generated Knowledge Prompting, the
first DLLM extracts entities from the given text with prompts consistent with Chain-of-Thought, and the second DLLM provides
additional knowledge for the text with the prompt: “You are an expert of natural language processing in the field of [X], Please
supplement the given text with more knowledge and insights, keeping it around 500 words”, where, the combinations for the first and
second DLLMs are: GPT-4-Turbo / GPT-3.5-Turbo.

Table 2
Dataset description.
Name

Domain

Entity category

Entity count

Word count

Entertainment
Energy
Ecommerce
Chemical
News

Youku Entertainment
Shenhua Energy
Taobao E-commerce
Brunei Chemical
Conll2003 News

Television, person, MISC
Equipment, material
Pattern, product, brand, MISC
Equipment, material, state, consequence
Location, person, organization, MISC

15,905
4649
10,025
9834
35,089

179,798
82,657
240,814
109,631
301,418

9

Information Processing and Management 62 (2025) 104054

Z. Wang et al.

5.3. Setting
For the DLLM, we select the currently representative OpenAI’s GPT-4-Turbo (GPT-4); and for the ELLM, we select the popular
DeBERTa-v2-xlarge. In all experiments involving DLLMs, we use the same inference methods and parameters, set to default settings;
and in all training involving ELLMs, the configuration remains consistent, such as batch-size = 8, learning-rate = 2e-5, epoch = 5, δ =
0.5, etc. We randomly divide each dataset into training and test sets in an 8:2 ratio, and use the commonly-used F1-score (F1, %) as the
evaluation metric, where, F1 is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, which provides a comprehensive and balanced measure.
Each round of experiments is repeated five times, with the results averaged to ensure reliability. The prompts involved in the baselines
can be adjusted based on the domain of datasets. For example, in the entertainment domain, the prompts related to clinical in
HuPrompt are replaced with entertainment related terms.
6. Result
6.1. Competitiveness of LLMCC
Table 3 demonstrates that our LLMCC outperforms all baselines across all datasets, achieving the highest performance. For
instance, LLMCC surpasses a series of recently proposed approaches led by DLLMs, such as GPT-NER, by margins of 4.89 %, 5.32 %, 5.7
%, 8.53 %, and 4.91 %, respectively. Moreover, LLMCC excels beyond the models driven by language model training, such as out­
performing DeFFSi by 2.25 %, 2.61 %, 1.7 %, 2.11 %, and 2.18 %, respectively. These results confirm the advancement of integrating
LLM into NER.
6.2. Effectiveness of Inforlaw-thought
Table 4 highlights the enhancement of GPT-4′s performance through our InforLaw-thought. Compared to Role-Playing, which relies
solely on GPT-4′s inherent capabilities, InforLaw-thought achieves performance improvements of over 1 % across all datasets, and even
leads by over 2 % in entertainment and energy domains. Moreover, InforLaw-thought exhibits competitiveness against recent methods.
For instance, it outperforms Tree-of-Thought by 1.2 % in the ecommerce domain and exceeds Self-Consistency by 1.34 % in the
chemical domain. Undoubtedly, InforLaw-thought is advanced.
6.3. Progressiveness of SemnRank
The role of demonstration retrieval is crucial for DLLMs. To evaluate the advancement of our demonstration retriever, SemnRank,
we compare it against commonly-used methods, such as the Random method and the KNN-semantics method (Wang et al., 2023b;
Polak & Morgan, 2024). Also, considering that the number of demonstrations, k, is a critical factor, we extend our evaluation to include
variations in k. The results are depicted in Fig. 2.
SemnRank consistently outshines previous methods across all datasets. Its superior performance is especially evident as k increases,
showing its robustness. Notably, the performance gap widens when k > 5, highlighting a signal where the redundancy among dem­
onstrations can become detrimental to model efficiency, that once k reaches a certain threshold. Thus, SemnRank proves to be
increasingly powerful.
A finding is the presence of diminishing marginal returns with increasing k. While the initial increments in k substantially enhance
the performance of LLMCC, the benefits taper off as k continues to rise. This phenomenon underscores a balance, beyond which
additional demonstrations do not translate to proportional gains.
6.4. Impact of text extension
To investigate the impact of the amount (word count) settings on LLMCC’s Module 1, we direct GPT-4 to generate text extensions of
Table 3
Competition results (F1, %) between NER methods, k = 15.
Method/Model

Entertainment

Energy

Ecommerce

Chemical

News

GPT-NER
BERT-Tagger
MRC-NER
GNN-SL
ACE-document-context
CPGF
HuPrompt
SpiralPrompt
ChatExtract
DeFFSi
LLMCC

79.83
81.43
81.92
81.41
81.99
79.50
79.13
78.47
79.04
82.47
84.72

66.63
68.44
68.06
68.60
68.22
66.63
65.96
65.52
66.22
69.34
71.95

83.53
85.60
86.43
86.43
86.22
83.25
83.41
82.46
83.64
87.53
89.23

80.41
84.10
85.61
84.38
85.23
80.90
80.11
79.57
80.93
86.83
88.94

90.91
92.80
93.04
93.20
94.60
88.93
89.88
89.13
90.64
93.67
95.85

10

Information Processing and Management 62 (2025) 104054

Z. Wang et al.

Table 4
Competition results (F1, %) between prompting methods.
Method

Entertainment

Energy

Ecommerce

Chemical

News

Role-Playing
Few-Shot-Prompt
Chain-of-Thought
Few-Shot-CoT
Self-Consistency
Least-to-Most
Tree-of-Thought
Generated Knowledge Prompting
InforLaw-thought

82.61
83.26
83.89
84.12
82.97
83.88
83.96
84.00
84.72

69.94
70.34
70.73
70.79
70.97
70.78
70.74
70.34
71.95

88.25
88.81
88.82
88.84
88.59
88.21
88.03
88.76
89.23

87.54
88.19
88.36
88.40
87.60
87.53
87.69
87.65
88.94

94.95
95.56
95.49
95.58
95.05
95.12
95.52
95.37
95.85

Fig. 2. LLMCC’s performance changes (F1, %) based on the demonstration retrieval.

varying lengths, ranging from 50 to 800 words, and observe changes in LLMCC’s performance, as depicted in Fig. 3.
We find that LLMCC’s performance is relatively lower with fewer words. This outcome is attributed to the reduced number of
entities expanded and the limited knowledge of GPT-4 embedded within the extended text. As the word count increases, LLMCC’s
performance gradually improves, however, beyond a certain point, performance begins to fluctuate and even slightly decline. We
believe that prompting GPT-4 to extend each sentence to excessive lengths may exceed its inherent knowledge constraints, leading to
potential errors such as hallucinations in the extended text, which in turn hampers model performance.
These results show the effectiveness of our strategy (see the No-limit), which leverages dynamic text volumes to optimize benefits.
By not rigidly restricting the word count, GPT-4 dynamically adjusts based on the content’s complexity and depth, ensuring a balance
between information richness and accuracy.
6.5. Ablation experiment for entity-aware contrastive learning
In Section 4.3, we present our Contextual Continuity Loss (CCL), and various positive and negative pairs: Human-tagged entity /
Human-tagged entity; LLM-tagged entity / Human-tagged entity; Human-tagged entity / Human-tagged non-entity; and LLM-tagged
entity / LLM-tagged entity (pair type 1–4). By observing changes in LLMCC’s performance upon the removal of each of them, we assess
their respective contributions.
Experiment results (Table 5) demonstrate a decline in LLMCC’s performance upon the exclusion of each pair type, confirming their
beneficial roles. This indicates that our learning approach effectively bridges DLLMs and ELLMs, enhancing their utility for NER.
Furthermore, the results affirm the effectiveness of CCL.

Fig. 3. LLMCC’s performance changes (F1, %) based on the word count.
11

Information Processing and Management 62 (2025) 104054

Z. Wang et al.

Table 5
Ablation results (F1, %) for entity-aware contrastive learning.
Method/Model

Entertainment

Energy

Ecommerce

Chemical

News

LLMCC (without pair type 1)
LLMCC (without pair type 2)
LLMCC (without pair type 3)
LLMCC (without pair type 4)
LLMCC (without CCL)
LLMCC (total)

84.07
84.17
84.49
84.16
84.32
84.72

71.55
71.27
71.62
71.25
71.40
71.95

88.97
88.75
88.89
88.94
88.97
89.23

88.22
88.21
88.62
88.30
88.39
88.94

95.39
95.42
95.12
95.55
95.24
95.85

6.6. Influence of information laws
To explore the impact of various information laws on LLMCC’s performance, we conduct experiments by fixing each individual law
to InforLaw-thought’s DLS. Fig. 4 indicates that all laws can improve LLMCC’s capabilities, outperforming the baseline InforLawthought without a law. Specifically, Zipf’s law often provides the highest gain, followed by Heaps’ law, and in some scenarios,
such as the ecommerce domain, Heaps’ law outperforms Zipf’s law (89.02 % vs. 88.88 %). The other six laws do not perform as well as
these two.
We speculate that this is because Zipf’s law and Heaps’ law directly model word and vocabulary in the text, which are the basic
structural units of text and carry meaning information, thus helping DLLMs to have a more intuitive understanding of text. In contrast,
other laws focus on different aspects, such as Benford’s law on numerical patterns, which may not provide an intuitive understanding
of the text, resulting in weaker improvements.
Another observation is that Ebeling’s law proves to be most effective in the chemical domain, which we suppose is due to the law’s
focus on the composition and density of text. Chemical texts typically contain highly structured information involving the precise use
of chemical nomenclature and the sequential nature of specific chemical processes (see the demonstrations in Section 4.1), which
aligns closely with the modeling of Ebeling’s law, thereby allowing DLLMs to gain a better understanding of chemical texts.
6.7. Gain of entity prediction enhancement
LLMCC’s Module 4, Entity Prediction Enhancement (EPE), reflects the assistance that DLLMs can provide to ELLM predictions. To
better evaluate this potential, we conduct assessments not only with GPT-4 but also incorporate representative DLLMs such as GPT-3.5Turbo and GPT-4o.
Experiment results displayed in Fig. 5 demonstrate that LLMCC configurations equipped with EPE consistently outperform those
without EPE. This substantiates the effectiveness of EPE, and illustrates the clever utilization of DLLMs’ capabilities to guide and assist
ELLMs in a predictive enhancement format.
6.8. Zipf’s law for chain-of-thought
Considering that Zipf’s law can bring more benefits to DLLM compared to other laws, we use it as a representative to explore its
impact on the currently most popular method, Chain-of-Thought (CoT). We find that simply adding a prompt like "analyze the text
using Zipf’s law" to CoT can significantly enhance DLLM’s effectiveness for NER, see Fig. 6. For example, in the energy domain, GPT4o-based LLMCC performance is improved by 1.72 %, and GPT-3.5-Turbo’s is improved by 1.91 %. This interesting phenomenon
suggests that deliberately guiding DLLMs to " analyze " the text step by step via Zipf’s law can improve their performance. We hope this
insight can be extended to future research as an option for exploratory attempts.

Fig. 4. LLMCC’s performance changes (F1, %) based on information laws.
12

Information Processing and Management 62 (2025) 104054

Z. Wang et al.

Fig. 5. LLMCC’s performance changes (F1, %) based on the entity prediction enhancement.

Fig. 6. Gain (F1, %) brought by Zipf’s law to the CoT.

7. Discussion
This paper presents an innovative integration of DLLMs and ELLMs, showcasing strategic learning and training to complement their
respective strengths. This integration establishes a new NER paradigm in the era of LLMs, thereby broadening the scope of previous
NER frameworks that tend to predominantly focus on either DLLMs or ELLMs. The LLMCC framework not only outperforms existing
methodologies in performance, but also yields a series of additional contributions.
Firstly, addressing RO1, we address the issue of demonstration meaning redundancy for in-context learning, illustrating that it can
be effectively managed through LLM-based meaning entailment. This insight is likely to extend to other demonstration-based sce­
narios, paving the way for better utilization of LLMs. Moreover, regarding the number of demonstrations, we find that while more
demonstrations generally improve LLM’s performance, there is a balance to be struck - beyond a certain threshold, additional dem­
onstrations do not yield proportional gains. This balance is crucial for maintaining computational efficiency and avoiding diminishing
returns.
Secondly, addressing RO2, we pioneer an interaction between information laws and LLMs by strategically encouraging LLMs to
model information laws, which enhances LLM performance beyond that of existing popular strategies. We find that Zipf’s law can bring
the highest gain. Additionally, we show that information laws can improve existing prompting methods (for example, Zipf’s law” can
enhance Chain-of-Thought), potentially inspiring subsequent research in other tasks such as text classification and sentiment analysis.
Thirdly, addressing RO3, we construct a novel learning approach that allows the model to learn from differences, and context
across entities. Moreover, we consider entities within and beyond the categories from humans and LLMs, and introduce the contextual
continuity loss, which can serve as complements to contrastive learning, aiding peers in their research.
Next, we discuss the underlying mechanisms by which information laws enhance LLM performance. Under InforLaw-thought, we
replace the dynamic law selector with distinct information laws to track the response and thinking processes of LLM, represented by
GPT-4. The example text we have chosen comes from the Energy dataset, due to its real-world and practical significance:
Text: “… Operators shut down the CO process in the drying tower and initiate the regeneration process, introducing nitrogen gas at
0.8 MPa (using steel cylinder liquid nitrogen which vaporizes to produce nitrogen gas, with the safety valve of the liquid nitrogen tank
13

Information Processing and Management 62 (2025) 104054

Z. Wang et al.

set to activate at 0.8 MPa). The external wall electric heater of the drying tower heats up to over 200 ◦ C to regenerate the desiccant. The
heated nitrogen gas after regeneration is vented after passing through a water cooler. No collection data is available for the drying
tower’s skid-mounted equipment …”
It is observed that LLMs initially leverage insights derived from information laws to comprehend text. This process typically follows
a sequence of operations: Text Extraction –> Data Analysis –> Calculation of Information Law Properties (e.g., the mean and variance
of text for Taylor’s Law) –> Model Fitting Using Information Law –> Interpreting the Results –> Insight Generation (e.g., the term
"valve" displays high variance relative to its mean, indicating its importance). During this process, the LLM may engage in multiple
rounds of Insight Generation, such as Adjustments and Re-evaluations, particularly under Taylor’s Law. Subsequently, the LLM invites
three peers for a brainstorming session to collaboratively discuss entity selection and classification. Due to space constraints, this
section presents the results of brainstorming under Zipf’s Law, Taylor’s Law, and Menzerath’s Law (see the Appendix).
It is found that across different laws, LLMs consistently emphasize understanding contextual relevance. Whether considering the
term frequency and ranking (Zipf’s Law), variability and distribution (Taylor’s Law), or sentence structure and length (Menzerath’s
Law), each discussion assesses how these elements impact text processing and the relevance and classification of entities. This
contextual understanding of the given text is beneficial for entity extraction, the sequential task. Moreover, the experts involved with
LLM are interdisciplinary. Typically, AI specialist, language specialist, and NLP specialist are invited. In certain cases, such as under
Taylor’s Law, where term variability in the text may be pronounced, specialists like chemical process specialists, safety systems an­
alysts, and equipment design engineers are invited. These experts analyze the changes from a practical standpoint, such as considering
a "Steel Cylinder" as an operational container, thereby classifying it as an equipment entity. This analysis goes beyond mere linguistic
context, focusing instead on the practical implications of the terms within their real-world applications.
In addition, different laws automatically guide LLM to question and discuss entities differently, for example:
1. Focus based on characteristics: Zipf’s Law: Discussions often revolve around the most frequently mentioned entities and their
ranking. This leads to emphasizing entities like "nitrogen gas" or "heat exchangers" due to their frequent mention. Taylor’s Law:
Variability and distribution are key, which brings different entities into focus, such as "safety valve" or "pressure relief systems,"
especially if their mentions vary significantly across different sections. Menzerath’s Law: The focus on sentence structure and word
length highlights entities described using shorter, more frequent terms in complex descriptions, like "reactor" or "steel cylinder."
2. Criteria for importance: In Zipf’s, the frequency can make an entity seem more critical, which results in more straightforward
debates based strictly on frequency data. In Taylor’s, the variability in mentions across text sections can indicate critical items,
reflecting interpretations of how entities relate to energy variability. In Menzerath’s, the structural significance (e.g., shorter terms
in longer sentences) might highlight entities that simplify complex operational descriptions, influencing how the significance of
entities is perceived.
Also, under various laws, while LLMs exhibit similar reasoning procedures, such as Interdisciplinary Engagement (involving ex­
perts from multiple disciplines in all discussions), Multi-Stage Review (multiple rounds of discussion), Consensus Building (empha­
sizing the need to establish consensus among experts), and Focus on Contextual Relevance (strong emphasis on understanding the
background and relevance of entities), there are still differences in the discussion approaches. For instance, under Taylor’s Law, the
term "Steel Cylinder" becomes a focal point where the first two experts classify it as a material, while the last considers it as equipment.
In contrast, under Zipf’s Law, "Steel Cylinder" is not a focal point, and LLM directly categorizes it as equipment without the need for
expert discussion. This highlights how the application of different information laws can lead to varying interpretations and handling of
the same terms within a text, shaping the model’s decision-making process.
8. Conclusion
In this study, we focus on NER for knowledge graphs during the LLM era. To address the limitations of previous research regarding
the LLM selection, demonstration retrieval, and prompt design, we propose a novel and comprehensive NER framework, LLMCC.
Specifically, we synergistically bridge DLLMs and ELLMs, combining their respective strengths to enhance NER. Additionally, to
improve the in-context learning, we introduce SemnRank, which addresses the redundancy of demonstration retrieval through se­
mantic similarity computations and bidirectional meaning entailment detection. We also propose InforLaw-thought, a prompting
strategy informed by insights from information laws, to achieve superior prompt designs. Furthermore, we introduce Entity-aware
Contrastive Learning to train the LLMCC effectively, ensuring an entity-focused learning process.
Extensive experiments have been conducted across five domains, demonstrating the competitiveness of LLMCC. Moreover, we
contribute additional insights regarding the interaction between different LLMs, the selection and application of information laws,
considerations around prompts and the number of demonstrations, and strategies for enhancing demonstration quality and model
training, among other factors.
Future work could pursue more direct coupling between DLLMs and ELLMs. For instance, these models could be jointly trained,
allowing for the interchange of parameters between decoders and encoders; Also, they could implement an interactive feature sharing
where DLLMs can directly utilize the features gained by ELLMs and vice versa. This could involve developing shared attention
mechanisms or memory layers that allow models to access and benefit from each other’s processed data in real-time.

14

Information Processing and Management 62 (2025) 104054

Z. Wang et al.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Zhenhua Wang: Writing – original draft, Resources, Methodology, Investigation, Data curation, Conceptualization. Huiru Chen:
Resources, Investigation. Guang Xu: Methodology, Investigation. Ming Ren: Writing – original draft, Supervision, Funding acqui­
sition, Data curation.
Acknowledements
This research is supported by the Outstanding Innovative Talents Cultivation Funded Programs 2023 of Renmin University of
China, and Major Project by Ministry of Education Key Research Institute of Humanities and Social Sciences (No. 22JJD870001).
Appendix 1: DLLM’s thoughts on Zipf’s law

### Initial Entity Session:Expert 1 (AI Specialist) focuses on statistical significance:
• Proposes entities based on the highest frequencies and most significant ranks from Zipf’s analysis.
• Initial list includes "nitrogen gas", "valve", "drying tower", "reaction vessel", "heat exchangers".
Expert 2 (Language Specialist) emphasizes context:
• Reviews the usage context of each term to ensure the relevance to equipment or materials.
• Suggests that "sour gas" and "highly volatile liquid chemical" are critical materials due to their specific mentions in critical process descriptions.
Expert 3 (NLP Specialist) assesses semantic consistency:
• Examines how terms are related within the text, advocating for the inclusion of "steel cylinder" and "liquid nitrogen tank" as equipment due to their roles in
containing and processing materials.
### First Round of Discussions: Challenging Initial Findings:Regarding "Steel Cylinder":
• Expert 1 views it merely as a container, questioning its operational significance.
• Expert 2 and Expert 3 argue for its critical role in safety and process control, detailing how it integrates with the system’s pressure management.
On the Classification of "Nitrogen Gas":
• Expert 1 categorizes it straightforwardly as a material.
• Expert 2 raises a point about its dual role, also affecting safety protocols, which might blur lines between material and equipment.
• Expert 3 supports its listing as material, emphasizing its consistent usage across different operational phases.
### Second Round of Discussions: Refining Entity List
• Dispute over "Water Cooler":
○ Expert 1 initially overlooks it as non-essential.
○ Expert 2 highlights its essential role in controlling process temperature, crucial for safety.
○ Expert 3 aligns with Expert 2, emphasizing its functional necessity in maintaining system integrity.
• Re-evaluation of "Reaction Vessel":
○ All agree on its importance but revisit its description to ensure comprehensive understanding.
○ Expert 2 and Expert 3 provide detailed explanations on how it interacts with other components like "valve LV1003″ and "sour gas", ensuring a holistic view.
### Final Consensus Building: Agreement on Entities
• Experts review the entire list, ensuring every entity is justified with textual evidence and expert analysis.
• They finalize the terms, with each expert agreeing on the importance and context of every listed entity, ensuring no critical component is missed.
• Final Adjustments:
○ Minor adjustments are made based on the last discussions, such as adding "external wall electric heater" after Expert 3 argues for its significance in the
regeneration process not initially covered.

Appendix 2: DLLM’s thoughts on Taylor’s Law

### Initial Entity Session:Expert 1 (Chemical Process Specialist), Expert 2 (Safety Systems Analyst), and Expert 3 (Equipment Design Engineer) start by
listing entities from the text. They use their respective expertise to focus on different aspects of the text:
• Expert 1 notes all terms related to chemical processes and materials.
• Expert 2 focuses on safety components and implications.
• Expert 3 identifies all mechanical and structural equipment.
### Discussion Round 1: Reconciling Different PerspectivesOn "Steel Cylinder"
• Expert 1: Argues that the "steel cylinder" should be considered as part of the material because it’s directly involved in handling and storing the nitrogen gas, which
is critical to the process.
• Expert 2: Supports Expert 1, emphasizing the cylinder’s role in safety due to its pressure specifications and links to the safety valve.
• Expert 3: Suggests classifying it as equipment because it’s a physical container used operationally.
Consensus: After discussion, they agree to classify "steel cylinder" as equipment because it serves a functional role in the operational setup, beyond just containing
material.On "Nitrogen Gas"
• Expert 1: Highlights its role as a material used in the process.
(continued on next page)

15

Information Processing and Management 62 (2025) 104054

Z. Wang et al.

(continued )
• Expert 2: Notes the safety implications of nitrogen gas pressure and temperature.
• Expert 3: Considers it incidental to the equipment function.
Consensus: Unanimously agreed to be classified as a material due to its use in the chemical process.
### Discussion Round 2: Clarifying AmbiguitiesOn "Water Cooler"
• Expert 1: Initially overlooks this, focusing more on gases and chemicals.
• Expert 2: Points out its critical role in cooling and safety after heated processes.
• Expert 3: Stresses its importance in maintaining equipment integrity and preventing overheating.
Consensus: Classified as equipment. The discussion helps highlight its operational necessity, affecting both safety and process efficiency.On "Reaction Vessel"
• Expert 1: Identifies it as central to the chemical reaction process.
• Expert 2: Concerned with the safety aspects, particularly with overpressure and chemical imbalances.
• Expert 3: Focuses on its design and structural integrity.
Consensus: Clearly classified as equipment, pivotal in all respects—process, safety, and design.
### Discussion Round 3: Final AdjustmentsThey review the list to ensure no entity is misclassified and check for consistency in their reasoning. They also verify
that the entities align with both the operational and safety protocols described in the text.Final Validations
• Each expert reviews the entire list to ensure no key entity is omitted and that their classification reflects both the text’s content and their expert understanding.
• They discuss the implications of missing data (e.g., no collection data for drying tower’s skid-mounted equipment) and agree on caution in assuming roles or
importance without explicit mentions.

Appendix 3: DLLM’s thoughts on Menzerath’s law

### Initial ObservationsExpert 1 (AI Specialist) starts by presenting a detailed analysis:
• Calculates average word lengths across various sentence lengths, discovering that technical sections with numerous equipment mentions defy typical Menzerath’s
law patterns by using unusually concise terminology more frequently than expected.
• Highlights specific sections where complexity is reduced due to shorter words in longer sequences, such as descriptions involving "reactor", "steel cylinder", and
"heat exchangers".
Expert 2 (Language Specialist) examines these findings:
• Confirms that shorter, frequent terms in lengthy descriptions often pertain to technical components crucial to understanding the operational processes.
• Notes specific instances where procedural descriptions involve safety components like "safety valve" and "pressure relief systems", which use compact yet frequent
terminology.
Expert 3 (NLP Specialist) analyses semantic structure:
• Maps relationships between terms highlighted by Expert 1, confirming that "nitrogen gas" and "reactor" are often discussed in conjunction with safety measures.
• Validates that the semantic context supports the clustering of technical terms in specific operational descriptions.
### Discussion Round 1: Resolving DiscrepanciesDebate on "liquid nitrogen tank":
• Expert 1 questions its significance based on average word length, noting it falls within typical parameters.
• Expert 2 argues for its critical role, evidenced by repeated mentions in safety protocols.
• Expert 3 provides semantic analysis showing strong links between "liquid nitrogen tank" and "safety valve", indicating critical operational importance.
### Discussion Round 2: Clarifying AmbiguitiesClassification of "external wall electric heater" and "water cooler":
• Expert 1 notes these terms appear in sentences that align well with Menzerath’s law, suggesting they are not as critical.
• Expert 2 emphasizes their importance in maintaining operational temperatures and pressures, critical for safety and efficiency.
• Expert 3 agrees, pointing out that semantic connections to "thermal variation" and "regeneration process" justify their inclusion as key equipment.
### Discussion Round 3: Reviewing Uncertain Terms
• All experts revisit terms like "steel cylinder" and "external wall electric heater" to ensure their classifications align with both linguistic patterns and operational
context.
• Expert 1 reassesses the linguistic data, confirming anomalies where important terms defy expected patterns due to their technical significance.
• Expert 2 and Expert 3 refine the contextual and semantic justifications, ensuring all terms are correctly categorized and linked.
### Final Entity List Approval
• After extensive discussions and adjustments, a final review session confirms the accuracy of the entity list.
• All terms are agreed upon, with clear classifications under "Equipment" and "Material", ensuring that the entity list reflects a deep understanding of the text’s
content and the complexities of the operations described.

Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Akkaya, I., Aleman, F.L. et al. (2023). Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774.
Dagdelen, J., Dunn, A., Lee, S., Walker, N., Rosen, A. S., Ceder, G., et al. (2024). Structured information extraction from scientific text with large language models.
Nature Communications, 15(1), 1418.

16

Information Processing and Management 62 (2025) 104054

Z. Wang et al.

Devlin, J., Chang M., Lee K., and Toutanova K. (2019). BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In NAACL, pages
4171–4186.
Dong, X. L. (2023). Generations of Knowledge Graphs: The Crazy Ideas and the Business Impact. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 16(12), 4130–4137.
Fan, Z., & Chen, C. (2024). CuPe-KG: Cultural perspective–based knowledge graph construction of tourism resources via pretrained language models. Information
Processing & Management, 61(3), Article 103646.
Farquhar, S., Kossen, J., Kuhn, L., & Gal, Y. (2024). Detecting hallucinations in large language models using semantic entropy. Nature, 630(8017), 625–630.
Gao, J., Peng, P., Lu, F., Claramunt, C., Qiu, P., & Xu, Y. (2024a). Mining tourist preferences and decision support via tourism-oriented knowledge graph. Information
Processing & Management, 61(1), Article 103523.
Gao, W., Zheng, C., Zhu, X., Deng, H., Wang, Y., & Hu, G. (2024b). Knowledge-injected prompt learning for actionable information extraction from crisis-related
tweets. Computers and Electrical Engineering, 118, Article 109398.
Huang, J., Yang, D. M., Rong, R., Nezafati, K., Treager, C., Chi, Z., et al. (2024). A critical assessment of using ChatGPT for extracting structured data from clinical
notes. npj Digital Medicine, 7(1), 106.
Hu, Y., Chen, Q., Du, J., Peng, X., Keloth, V. K., Zuo, X., et al. (2024). Improving large language models for clinical named entity recognition via prompt engineering.
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, ocad259.
Jehangir, B., Radhakrishnan, S., & Agarwal, R. (2023). A survey on named entity recognition—datasets, tools, and methodologies. Natural Language Processing Journal,
3, Article 100017.
Kan, Z., Feng, L., Yin, Z., Qiao, L., Qiu, X., & Li, D. (2023). A composable generative framework based on prompt learning for various information extraction tasks.
IEEE Transactions on Big Data, 9(4), 1238–1251.
Keloth, V. K., Hu, Y., Xie, Q., Peng, X., Wang, Y., Zheng, A., et al. (2024). Advancing entity recognition in biomedicine via instruction tuning of large language models.
Bioinformatics, 40(4), btae163.
Kocoń, J., Cichecki, I., Kaszyca, O., Kochanek, M., Szydło, D., Baran, J., et al. (2023). ChatGPT: Jack of all trades, master of none. Information Fusion, 99, Article
101861.
Kojima, T., Gu, S. S., Reid, M., Matsuo, Y., & Iwasawa, Y. (2022). Large language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances In Neural Information Processing Systems, 35,
22199–22213.
Li, X., Feng, J., Meng, Y., Han, Q., Wu, F., & Li, J. (2020). A unified MRC framework for named entity recognition. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (pp. 5849–5859).
Liu, J., Liu, A., Lu, X., Welleck, S., West, P., Bras, R.L. et al. (2021). Generated knowledge prompting for commonsense reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08387.
McIntosh, T. R., Liu, T., Susnjak, T., Watters, P., Ng, A., & Halgamuge, M. N. (2023). A culturally sensitive test to evaluate nuanced gpt hallucination. IEEE Transactions
on Artificial Intelligence.
Polak, M. P., & Morgan, D. (2024). Extracting accurate materials data from research papers with conversational language models and prompt engineering. Nature
Communications, 15(1), 1569.
Qi, X., Zeng, Y., Xie, T., Chen, P.Y., Jia, R., Mittal, P. et al. (2023). Fine-tuning aligned language models compromises safety, even when users do not intend to!. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.03693.
Stanisz, T., Drożdż, S., & Kwapień, J. (2024). Complex systems approach to natural language. Physics Reports, 1053, 1–84.
Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux, M.A., Lacroix, T. et al. (2023). Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:
2302.13971.
Triguero, I., Molina, D., Poyatos, J., Del Ser, J., & Herrera, F. (2024). General purpose artificial intelligence systems (GPAIS): Properties, definition, taxonomy, societal
implications and responsible governance. Information Fusion,, 103, Article 102135.
Voronov, A., Wolf, L., & Ryabinin, M. (2024). Mind your format: Towards consistent evaluation of in-context learning improvements. arXiv preprint arXiv:
2401.06766.
DeMarzo, G., Gabrielli, A., Zaccaria, A., & Pietronero, L. (2021). Dynamical approach to Zipf’s law. Physical Review Research, 3(1), Article 013084.
Wang, Z., Zhang, B., & Gao, D. (2021a). Text mining of hazard and operability analysis reports based on active learning. Processes, 9(7), 1178.
Wang, X., Jiang, Y., Bach, N., Wang, T., Huang, Z., Huang, F., et al. (2021b). Automated concatenation of embeddings for structured prediction. In Proceedings of the
59th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics and the 11th international joint conference on natural language processing (Volume 1: Long Papers)
(pp. 2643–2660).
Wang, Z., Liu, H., Liu, F., & Gao, D. (2022a). Why KDAC? A general activation function for knowledge discovery. Neurocomputing, 501, 343–358.
Wang, Z., Zhang, B., & Gao, D. (2022b). A novel knowledge graph development for industry design: a case study on indirect coal liquefaction process. Computers in
Industry, 139, Article 103647.
Wang, Z., Ren, M., Gao, D., & Li, Z. (2023a). A Zipf’s law-based text generation approach for addressing imbalance in entity extraction. Journal of Informetrics, 17(4),
Article 101453.
Wang, S., Sun, X., Li, X., Ouyang, R., Wu, F., Zhang, T. et al. (2023b). Gpt-ner: Named entity recognition via large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10428.
Wang, S., Meng, Y., Ouyang, R., Li, J., Zhang, T., Lyu, L. et al. (2023c). GNN-SL: Sequence labeling based on nearest examples via GNN. In Findings of the association
for computational linguistics: acl 2023 (pp. 12679–12692).
Wang, Z., Wang, B., Ren, M., & Gao, D. (2023d). A new hazard event classification model via deep learning and multifractal. Computers in Industry, 147, Article
103875.
Wang, Z., He, S., Xu, G., & Ren, M. (2024a). Will sentiment analysis need subculture? A new data augmentation approach. Journal of the Association for Information
Science and Technology, 75(6), 655–670.
Wang, Z., Xu, G., & Ren, M. (2024b). LLM-generated natural language meets scaling laws: New explorations and data augmentation methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:
2407.00322.
Wang, Z., Zhang, F., Ren, M., & Gao, D. (2024c). A new multifractal-based deep learning model for text mining. Information Processing & Management, 61(1), Article
103561.
Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Xia, F., Chi, E., et al. (2022). Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 35, 24824–24837.
Yao, S., Yu, D., Zhao, J., Shafran, I., Griffiths, T., Cao, Y., et al. (2024). Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 36.
Zhang, F., Wang, B., Gao, D., Yan, C., & Wang, Z. (2024a). When grey model meets deep learning: A new hazard classification model. Information Sciences, 670, Article
120653.
Zhang, H., Zhang, C., & Wang, Y. (2024b). Revealing the technology development of natural language processing: A Scientific entity-centric perspective. Information
Processing & Management, 61(1), Article 103574.
Zhou, D., Schärli, N., Hou, L., Wei, J., Scales, N., Wang, X. et al. (2022). Least-to-most prompting enables complex reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.10625.
Zhou, W., Wang, Q., Xu, M., Chen, M., & Duan, X. (2024, May). Revisiting the self-consistency challenges in multi-choice question formats for large language model
evaluation. In LREC-COLING 2024. (pp. 14103–14110).

17

