Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Information Processing and Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ipm

Fine-grained legal entity annotation: A case study on the Brazilian
Supreme Court
Fernando A. Correia a,b ,∗, Alexandre A.A. Almeida a,b , José Luiz Nunes a,b ,
Kaline G. Santos a,b , Ivar A. Hartmann b , Felipe A. Silva b , Hélio Lopes a
a
b

Department of Informatics, PUC-Rio, Rua Marquês de São Vicente, 225, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 22451-900, Brazil
FGV Direito Rio, Fundação Getulio Vargas, Praia de Botafogo, 190, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 22250-900, Brazil

ARTICLE

INFO

Keywords:
Named Entity Recognition
Legal documents
Manual annotation task
Annotated corpus in Portuguese
Brazilian Supreme Court

ABSTRACT
The exploration of legal documents in the Brazilian Judiciary context lacks reliable annotated
corpus to support the development of new Natural Language Process (NLP) applications.
Therefore, this paper presents a step toward exploring legal decisions with Named Entity
Recognition (NER) in the Brazilian Supreme Court (STF) context. We aim to present a case
study on the fine-grained annotation task of legal decisions, performed by law students as
annotators where two levels of nested legal entities were annotated. Nested entities mapped
in a preliminary study composed of four coarser legal named entities and twenty-four nested
ones (fine-grained). The final result is a corpus of 594 decisions published by the STF annotated
by the 76 law students, those with the highest average inter-annotator agreement score. We also
present two baselines for NER based on Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) and Bidirectional
Long-Short Term Memory Networks (BiLSTMs). This corpus is the first of its kind, the most
extensive corpus known in Portuguese dedicated for legal named entity recognition, open and
available to better support further research studies in a similar context.

1. Introduction
As a natural consequence of the Brazilian Judicial System’s digitization a large and increasing number of legal documents have
become available on the Internet, especially judicial decisions. The Brazilian Supreme Court (STF, or Supremo Tribunal Federal)
alone has produced 115,603 thousand decisions in 2019 (Supremo Tribunal Federal, 2020) – adding up to 1.2 million during the
last decade. The high volume of rulings fueled a growing demand for quantitative studies focused on exploring legal information
in those documents. This demand comes not just from researchers or members of the legal profession (e.g., Judges, Lawyers, and
Prosecutors) (Veçoso et al., 2014) but also from lay people who wish to understand how the Judiciary actually works (Silva et al.,
2019). No lawyer can possibly get up to date on the Brazilian Supreme Court output by reading its opinions. The sheer amount of
rulings makes it so that computer science is a key element in processing and making sense of Brazilian case law.
Technology applied to the legal market in many countries has significantly increased the online availability of court rulings
worldwide, not only in Brazil. This, in turn, spurred the development of sophisticated natural language processing (NLP) techniques
for legal information extraction that are useful for various purposes, including legal search (Dadgosari et al., 2020), legal document
summarizing (Kanapala et al., 2019; Merchant & Pande, 2018), quantifying citation relevance (Correia et al., 2019; Galgani et al.,

∗ Corresponding author at: Department of Informatics, PUC-Rio, Rua Marquês de São Vicente, 225, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 22451-900, Brazil.
E-mail addresses: fjunior@inf.puc-rio.br (F.A. Correia), alex.aaa@aluno.puc-rio.br (A.A.A. Almeida), jnunes@inf.puc-rio.br (J.L. Nunes),
ksantos@inf.puc-rio.br (K.G. Santos), ivar.hartmann@fgv.br (I.A. Hartmann), felipe.asilva@fgv.br (F.A. Silva), lopes@inf.puc-rio.br (H. Lopes).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2021.102794
Received 28 January 2021; Received in revised form 30 July 2021; Accepted 11 October 2021
Available online 6 November 2021
0306-4573/© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

F.A. Correia et al.

2015), legal contracts inspection and management (Chalkidis et al., 2017), legal judgment prediction (Chalkidis et al., 2020;
Medvedeva et al., 2020), etc. Seen as a primary task for many of those NLP approaches, the Named Entity Recognition (NER)
aims to identify entity mentions in free text and classify them into types of information elements, called Named Entities (NE). Most
of the existing studies in NER have focused on languages such as English, French, and German, with a limited number of experiments
conducted in Portuguese (de Araujo et al., 2020; Freitas et al., 2010), and even fewer in the legal domain (Luz de Araujo et al.,
2018). In order to enable further studies using Brazilian Portuguese in a legal setting, in this article, we address the problem of
NER.
Works in NER are commonly based on newspaper text data or social media messages. Legal texts (e.g., opinions, rulings, and
contracts), however, constitute ‘‘a special case of highly conventionalized language that strives, and often struggles, to find an optimal
balance between rigorousness and flexibility, formality and understandability’’ (Höfler & Piotrowski, 2011). Moreover, most NER systems
deal only with flat named entities (NE) (e.g., date, person, and location) and ignore the inner nested ones. This approach fails to
capture fine-grained semantic information underlying legal texts.
As an illustration, in an STF ruling, a Justice’s name tagged as a ‘person’ in the text refers to one of possibly four different roles:
(i) the Justice who wrote the current opinion, (ii) the Justice who wrote a past decision (precedent) cited in the current the ruling,
(iii) the author of an academic work cited by the opinion, and (iv) a Justice who is part of the collegiate body deciding the case
at hand and who wrote a separate (either concurring or dissenting) opinion. Each of those four alternatives would lead to different
types of information. Suppose the intention is to explore whether his/her peers will cite opinions written by a particular Justice.
In this case, we need to identify references to the author of previous opinions (ii). However, if the goal is to identify the most
influential Justices, we should look at each of those meanings separately in order to attribute the proper weights.
In this paper, we present a case study on the fine-grained annotation task of court rulings by law students, in which two levels of
nested legal entities were annotated. Nested entities mapped in a preliminary study composed of four coarser legal named entities
and twenty-four nested ones (fine-grained). In that study, we took into account findings in previous legal research produced with
our research team’s support, such as Falcão et al. (2019), Pereira et al. (2020).
To ensure reliability and capture the nuances of legal reasoning, the annotation task had the collaboration of 95 law students from
the Escola de Direito do Rio de Janeiro da Fundação Getúlio Vargas (FGV-Direito Rio Law School). A collaboration that was possible
when aligning teaching and research: the task was performed as part of coursework of two disciplines focused on technology. The
annotation process was composed of three phases: two shorter training efforts and one longer final task. To measure the quality
of annotations and adjust the guidelines and instructions when needed, we used Cohen’s Kappa to measure the inter-annotator
agreement throughout the task.
Furthermore, for the annotation task, we assembled a set of 764 decisions published by the STF between 2009 and 2018.
The collection was carefully selected to ensure that it was somewhat representative of STF’s output, given the different origins
(authorship) and types of decisions produced by the Court. Since the decisions in the scope we were sampling from were usually
long (20 pages in average1 ), to ensure uniformity in size and workload per annotator, we broke long decisions into smaller texts
(excerpts): the initial corpus of 764 decisions became a collection of 1363 excerpts.
As a result, we built a manually annotated corpus based on those annotations that exceeded our qualities criteria: excerpts
annotated by at least two annotators and those with an average inter-annotator agreement score greater than 0.7. Therefore, we
present the most complete corpus of Brazilian legal decisions manually annotated for NER task with nested legal entities. The given
corpus contains excerpts from 594 decisions (62,933 sentences; 1,782,395 tokens; 33,055 coarser-grained annotations, and 57,573
fine-grained annotations). We also experimented with the presented corpus with two different NER strategies: Conditional Random
Fields (CRF) and bidirectional Long-Short Term Memory Networks with CRF (BiLSTM-CRF) for both levels of NE. The best results
were obtained with a CRF where the F1 score exceeds 0.9 for the majority of the named entities. We believe the methods employed
to construct the dataset are innovative and can be replicated in areas beyond the law, providing a strong baseline for further work.
In summary, the main contributions of the paper are as follows:
• We present a case study on the fine-grained annotation task of legal decisions performed by law students as annotators.
Annotation task performed as part of coursework for two disciplines focused on technology, an experiment in large-scale
annotation tasks integrating both teaching and research in legal technology.
• We present a detailed description of the annotation task design. Our main concern was avoiding turning the task into a burden
to the students by not competing for their attention with the other course activities. At the same time, make the most of their
attention to annotate a relevant collection of legal content that is somewhat representative of STF’s output.
• We introduce the first version of the largest corpus known in Portuguese dedicated for legal named entity recognition (detailed
description in 5.2).
• The preliminary results show the potential of the presented corpus to support further studies in NER.
The paper is organized into seven sections. Section 2 presents a brief review of the process of producing decisions by STF, which
was used as part of the decisions sampling process, and how NER can help researchers explore the massive amount of decisions
produced by the Brazilian judiciary. Section 3 presents a literature review of the subject. Section 4 describes the annotation task,
introduces the legal entities mapped, the methodology used in the annotation task, and the challenges we faced. The annotated

1 The majority has less than ten pages, a median of nine pages. The smallest ones have a single page. The largest one is a collegiate decision with 464 pages,
available on the Court’s website (accessed on April 3, 2021).

2

Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

F.A. Correia et al.

corpus description with statistical analysis is presented in Section 5, and experimental results with popular algorithms for NER is
presented in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 presents our conclusion sets out possible paths forward, briefly considering some of the
most promising ways to improve the area of legal elements extraction.
2. Background
2.1. The STF
The STF is the highest judicial body in Brazil and has its jurisdiction directed towards deciding constitutional issues and over
elected federal politicians and ministers.2 It is constituted of eleven Justices, with the role of Chief Justice being rotated every two
years. Each Justice sits in one of two different Panels and in the Plenary Court, where the Justices decide cases on the full bench.
Every new case filled in the STF is randomly assigned to one Justice, who might take individual decisions (which are dubbed
monocratic decisions and are subject to appeal towards one of the collegiate bodies) on cases or send them straight to one of the
collegiate bodies of the Court.3 In other words, a decision may have fourteen different origins: eleven Justices, two Panels, and the
Plenary (Veçoso et al., 2014).
The Justice assigned with a case is called the reporting Justice and is responsible for reporting the relevant facts of the case,
and issuing the first vote in cases decided by a Panel or the Plenary. Every other Justice in that collegiate body then gets his turn
and might subscribe to any previous opinions or render their dissenting or concurring own. The Court’s final decision is the result
of the aggregation of the opinions individually submitted. A summary of the decision is written by the first Justice to propose the
majority favored opinion.
Along with the judicial system’s digitization, decisions published by the STF became available on the Court’s website. According
to the official data, the Court has produced 126 thousand rulings solely in 2019. Given that information overload, it is humanly
impossible to extract relevant information in a systematic way. Therefore, computer science and information systems are vital to
process and digest the case law coming out of Brazilian courts. However, very little has been done. Few works were published
seeking to extract information from this increasing volume of documents (Correia et al., 2019; de Souza & Finger, 2020).
2.2. Named entities recognition
Seen as one of the most important subtasks for information extraction, the NER is a primary task for many of the NLP approaches.
This task aims to identify entity mentions in free text and classify them into types of information elements, called Named Entities
(NE). This task became popular in the mid-90s, and, since then, several studies have been published, and many annotated corpora
have been made available openly on the Internet. However, despite the relevance of NER, this area has received little academic
attention for languages not researched worldwide, like Portuguese.
Most of NER’s works focus on flat-mentioned structures which ignore essential information that can be useful for downstream
tasks. We focused on nested mentions structure, or nested named entities, to capture the fine-grained detail in legal documents. As
benefits of this strategy Ringland et al. (2019) enlists three phenomenons possible to embedded in this type of annotation:
• The Entity-entity relationships. For instance, in Fig. 1, the location of the ‘‘1a Turma Recursal Criminal’’ from the ‘‘Estado do
Rio de Janeiro’’.
• Entity attribute values. For instance, the title is the embedded ROLE ‘‘Ministro’’, which also encodes the employment relation
of the person ‘‘Herman Benjamin’’ being a justice at the court ‘‘STJ ’’.
• Part-whole relationships. For instance, the panel ‘‘Primeira Turma’’ is part of the court STF.
There are no limits to the number of levels for this kind of annotation. For instance, Fig. 2 illustrates two other types of multilevel
annotations. The first one is an example of expanded annotation of a precedent, identified by one decision and its court of origin.
The decision, in turn, is identified by its type and the legal procedure to which it is related. Its class and number usually identify the
legal procedure. However, both class and number may vary according to the standard defined by its court of origin.4 The second
citation in Fig. 2 is related to an academic citation, which a peculiar example. The citation refers to the book entitled ‘‘Mandado
de segurança’’ (in English, Writ of Mandamus) written by Luiz Fux. The peculiarity is that the author is also an STF’s Justice, who
has previously been a Justice of the Superior Court of Justice (STJ), and ‘‘Mandado de segurança’’ is also a name of a typical legal
procedure class.
Most of those legal entities could be extracted with a partner-match approach, if not for the variety of patterns and levels that
turns those techniques error-prone for the automatic identifications of the different phenomenons embedded in the annotation. Like
the entity attribute values: the ‘‘ROLE’’ of the person ‘‘Luiz Fux’’ may be ambiguous if not explicit in the text.
In order to facilitate the annotation process we adopted a hierarchical entity taxonomy of two levels: the coarser-grained (the
main categories) and the fine-grained (the sub-categories) (further details in Section 4.4).

2

For issues decided based on Federal Law, without Constitutional repercussions, the highest court in Brazil is the Superior Court of Justice (STJ).
More about the structure and organization of the STF can be found in the Court’s website https://www2.stf.jus.br/portalStfInternacional/cms/verConteudo.
php?sigla=portalStfSobreCorte_en_us&idConteudo=120283. Accessed in 04/02/2021.
4 The STF has 72 different classes and two different number formats: ‘‘CNJ ID’’ is one of then. The National Council of Justice (CNJ) defines a standard for
both information, but it is still a standard in implementation in the Brazilian Courts.
3

3

Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

F.A. Correia et al.

Fig. 1. Example of nested mentions in legal context.

Fig. 2. Example of complex nested mentions in legal context.

3. Related work
In this section, we focus on works directly related to the exploration of NER activities in the legal domain, mainly focused on
constructing annotated corpus including, but not limited to, the Brazilian judicial context. Since we also concerned ourselves with
the quality of the annotation task, we also present related works which focus on annotation reliability.
Despite the relevance of NER in the legal domain, this area received little academic attention. One of the first works to explore
the nuances of the legal entities, Chalkidis et al. (2017), presents a dataset with approximately 3500 English contracts manually
annotated with 11 categories of contract elements. With a flat category of named entities, they have mapped 11 legal NE to represent
essential contractual elements. Unlike generic NER systems, however, that may recognize dates without distinguishing whether they
mark the start or the end of a period, they proposed specific entities that take such contextual information into account: ‘start
date’, ‘terminative date’, and ‘effective date’. Also, they added legal NEs like ‘jurisdiction’ (which specifies the courts responsible
for resolving disputes), and ‘legislation references’ (for legal dispositions that the contract relies on). Ten law students performed
the annotation. To ensure quality, they conducted preliminary training rounds before the final annotation task. To evaluate the
|𝐴𝐵|
quality of annotations between rounds, they used 𝑚𝑎𝑥(|𝐴|,|𝐵|)
as an inter-annotator agreement measure, where 𝐴 and 𝐵 are sets
of contract elements marked by the two annotators, respectively. For the contract entity extraction, they tried different methods
combining manually written rules and linear classifiers (Logistic Regression (LR) and Linear Support Vector Machines (SVM)) with
hand-crafted features, word embedding, and part-of-speech (POS) tag embeddings. Our work is similar to Chalkidis et al. (2017)
in the sense of seeking to give more context to entities typically treated in a generic way. Besides, we also turn to law students as
domain experts for the annotation task.
In regards to legal decisions, Leitner et al. (2019) explored NER in Germany. Due to the complete absence of an annotated
dataset, they created and made available their own annotated dataset with 750 decisions manually annotated by one Computational
Linguistics student with fine-grained detailed legal entities. The source texts were manually annotated with 19 fine-grained categories
4

Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

F.A. Correia et al.

of NE – an approach similar to the one presented by Chalkidis et al. (2017) –, which then generalized into seven more coarse-grained
entities. As an illustration: an example of a coarse-grained entity is ‘person’, which can be one of three different fine-grained entities:
‘Person’, ‘Judge’, or ‘Lawyer’. They applied models based on CRFs and BiLSTM-CRF for both types of grained NE for the NER task.
They got the best performance with a BiLSTM-CRF model achieving a 95.46 F1 score for the fine-grained classes and 95.95 for the
coarse-grained ones. Their work inspired us in aspects related to the annotation design, although their results surpass our in terms
of experiment results. Their annotation procedure differs from ours in terms of strategy and the number of annotators involved. Our
main concerns were at the annotation quality to build a reliable corpus in Portuguese where annotations could capture Brazilian
legal texts’ nuances.
Focusing on the information extraction task, Ji et al. (2020) also explores the legal domain, and propose a model for evidence
information extraction task from court record documents (named BLACN). Their work is closely related to NER, but instead of
a sequence labeling problem, they model the evidence information extraction as a combination task of intermediate paragraph
classification and final sequence labeling. The evidence information extracted from paragraphs are divided into five categories,
which consists of ‘evidence provider’, ‘evidence name’, ‘evidence content’, ‘cross-examination party’, ‘and cross-examination opinion’.
To facilitate the evidence information extraction, the paragraphs are classified into two possible categories: ‘evidence production’
and ‘evidence cross-examination’. The presented model adopts a shared encoder followed by separated encoders for paragraph
classification and evidence extraction. To validate their proposal, they used a manually annotated dataset from Chinese courts with
1128 documents. Documents were collected from courts from several provinces and cities in China from 2013 to 2019 and annotated
by experts in the legal field. When compared with other approaches, the model outperforms by a large margin, with 72.36 F1. The
BLACN, presented by Ji et al. (2020), illustrates the exploration of the legal information extraction over a large collection of legal
documents. Our focus is not on the extraction task but on the annotation task. Even so, Ji et al. (2020) illustrates the value of
a relevant manually annotated dataset for the development of an effective method for legal information extraction. We hope to
support similar studies with our results.
For any NLP task, languages not widely researched worldwide, like Portuguese, suffer from the lack of annotated corpora. The
main barrier is the cost of building large and reliable datasets. Also, the annotation quality might be a limiting factor. According
to Galgani et al. (2015), ‘‘the persistent difficulty with building more sophisticated NLP systems is the extraordinary variety in which
certain content may be presented in natural language’’. Popular works like Luz de Araujo et al. (2018) in Portuguese have relied on
the collaboration of a few annotators with specialized knowledge in linguistics, but in order to annotate Brazil court rulings, legal
knowledge and expertise are a must. As academic researchers, we decided to stay in the academic environment and invite students
with specialized knowledge in law. To make it possible, we have developed an approach for fine-grained annotation tasks conducted
in a law school.
Very few studies focused on the Brazilian legal domain, and we have found only one dataset made available by Luz de Araujo
et al. (2018). This corpus is based on 70 legal documents, where 66 of those are decisions published by at least 10 different Brazilian
Courts and four legislation documents. With flat categories of named entities, the dataset is composed of six legal entities: ‘person’,
‘organization’, ‘time’, ‘location’, ‘legal case’, and ‘legislation’. Only the last two categories are closely related to the legal domain,
as ‘legal case’ refers to the citation of precedent and ‘legislation’ to statute dispositions. Due to the entities’ flat nature, the corpus
tends to represent those categories in a very simplified way that glosses over important fine-grained details, a shortcoming also
present in Chalkidis et al. (2017), and Leitner et al. (2019). Furthermore, their corpus has a large breadth, covering a large amount
of Courts with few documents in each. Our work, on the other hand, has targeted a more representative dataset in order to provide
enough data to develop information extraction, with the downside that it focus on a single court.
4. The annotation task design
4.1. A preliminary step with a pattern-match approach
As a preliminary step, we developed a precedent citation extractor using regular expressions. Unlike the U. S., there is no formal
standard procedure for precedent citation in the Brazilian judiciary. So, we tracked mentions of legal procedures on judicial opinions
by searching for a limited number of combinations of the procedural classes and the number each case receives upon filing. An
algorithm limited by common writing patterns used by the Justices of the STF: the legal procedure class (72 possible classes)
followed by a sequential number with less than six digits.5 This resulted in a noisy extraction. For instance, it does not allow
us to identify which opinion was cited as precedent if the cited case contained multiple ruling, e.g., a monocratic decision followed
by a collegiate decision on appeal (further details in Section 4.3.1). However, the method offered a useful first step towards our
current goals, enabling some exploratory research with valuable findings, as presented in (Correia et al., 2019).
We have processed the whole collection of decisions with this algorithm as a preliminary step before the sampling. We considered
it essential to ensure that the sample would contain a large number of entities to be identified. Important not only because we already
had direct evidence that one of our coarse-grained entities was present, but also because our prior is that there is a correlation
between a higher number of precedents citation and the likelihood of the opinion citing academic works.
An important point to state, is that with a pattern-match solution we were unable to recover most of the nested entities mapped
for this study. Furthermore, despite our best efforts we were unable to create a reliable pattern-matching solution to extract academic
citations and its inner entities, as presented in Fig. 5.

5

A version of this the algorithm adapted for both courts STF and Superior Tribunal of Justice (STJ) are available in https://github.com/joseluizn/extrator.
5

Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

F.A. Correia et al.
Table 1
Distribution of decisions per origins in the initial collection of decisions.
Type

Monocratic decisions

Collegiate decisions

Origin

Qtd.

Justice Ayres Britto
Justice Alexandre de Moraes
Justice Joaquim Barbosa
Justice Edson Fachin
Justice Marco Aurélio
Justice Teori Zavascki
Justice Roberto Barroso
Justice Gilmar Mendes
Justice Ricardo Lewandowski
Justice Cármen Lúcia
Justice Rosa Weber
Justice Celso de Mello
Justice Luiz Fux
Justice Dias Toffoli

8
14
15
19
20
21
27
29
32
33
39
40
40
45

Second Panel
First Panel
Plenary

91
138
153

4.2. Selection of decisions
For the annotation task, we assembled a set of 764 decisions published between 2009 and 2018. They were selected according
to the following criteria: (1) At least one precedent was identified in the decision content using the method described earlier; (2)
50% of them were monocratic decisions and 50% were collegiate decisions, and (3) stratified by its seventeen possible origins:
fourteen for monocratic decisions (eleven Justice from Court composition in 2018 plus three other Justices that were in previous
composition6 ), and 3 for collegiate decisions (both Panels and the Plenary), see Table 1 for the distribution summary.
In addition to those criteria, we were able to ensure a minimum representation of decisions per year of publication. On average,
76 decisions per year, the year 2009 was the least represented with 49 decisions, and 2018 was the most represented with 172
decisions. Aside from these years, the distribution is close to uniform for the remaining years.7
The second and third criteria were included to ensure that the corpus was somewhat representative of STF’s output. As presented
in Table 1, the origin with the fewest decisions was Justice Ayres Britto deciding individually, with only eight decisions, and the
Justice with the most extensive collection, was Justice Dias Toffoli, with 45 monocratic decisions. Because the decisions in the scope
we were sampling from were usually long, to ensure uniformity in size and workload per annotator, we broke long decisions into
smaller text documents.8 As a result, the initial corpus of 764 decisions became a collection of 1363 excerpts.
4.3. Annotated elements
As observed by Galgani et al. (2015), some factors make it challenging to capture the domain knowledge in systems where human
intuition guides the learning process. In order to best capture the detailed semantic information underlying the legal documents, we
conducted a preliminary study to map the entities presented in this work. In that study, we took into account findings in previous
legal research produced with the our team’s support, such as Falcão et al. (2019), Pereira et al. (2020). These entities were chosen
to take into account (1) the legal relevance of each entity in a broad perspective and (2) the intellectual effort required for the
classification. The first factor is related to how often the entity might appear in legal documents, how many values it can assume,
and how valuable it is in the context of legal reasoning. The second factor addresses the intellectual effort in the annotation process.
To avoid meaning conflicts between entities, or major disagreements between annotators, we have considered only entities that have
a meaning that is common sense in the legal domain.
We mapped four coarser legal entities: the precedent, the academic citation, the legislative reference, and the person. The
entity ‘person’ is the only one with no inner elements linked to it. This entity’s primary purpose is disambiguation, as both precedent
and academic citations have inner entities related to personal identification. The tag ‘person’ registers a person’s occurrence in the
text out of the context of these two other entities. In the following subsections, we explore each of these entities, along with the
inner entities related to them.

6 Justices Ayres Brittos and Joaquim Barbosa who retired in 2012 and 2014, and Justice Teori Zavascki who died in 2017 before leaving the Court; Justices
Roberto Barroso, Edson Fachin and Alexandre de Moraes were selected to take up those vacancies, respectively.
7 We opted not to stratify the sample by year since the year has a strong correlation with the reporting Justice, since there were some changes in the
composition during the time period (i.e., Justice Alexandre de Moraes joined the Court in 2017) also because it would lead to a large amount of strata which
would be hard to balance with the workload we could take for the annotation task.
8 The threshold was 30,000 characters, something close to 12 pages, larger documents were divided in chunks of 30,000 characters

6

Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

F.A. Correia et al.
Table 2
The complete list of fine-grained entities mapped for precedents.
Fine-grained entity

Type

Description

Legal Procedure Number

Number

The number that identifies the legal
procedure in court.

Legal Procedure Class

Text

Signals the kind of legal procedure. It
is often used along the case number to
uniquely identify a legal procedure
within STF.

Legal Procedure Origin

Text

Indicates from what state (or federation
unit) the legal procedure came, usually
just the acronym (e.g. RJ stands for Rio
de Janeiro).

Decision type

Text

Indicates if the decision referred is
related to an internal appeal or motion.

Reporting Justice

Text

Identifies the Justice responsible for
the decision (if a monocratic decision,
the Justice is also the origin).

Court

Text

The court which rendered the decision.

Judgment date

Date

When the decision was taken.

Publication date

Date

When the decision was introduced to the
official record.

Fig. 3. Example with two precedent long precedents citations.

Fig. 4. Example with one precedent citations in its simplest form.

4.3.1. The precedent
The precedent is a textual citation of a prior court ruling. This undoubtedly has great value in a common-law based judicial
system (Galgani et al., 2015; Leibon et al., 2018) – where courts are bound to their previous rulings, such as the United States,
Canada, and India. In the U.S., the citation of a precedent in a legal document follows a very standardized format, at least in
the Supreme Court. Due to that level of standardization, search databases for legal data, based on precedents, such as Shepard’s
Citations9 and Westlaw,10 have existed since the early 90s. Unfortunately, references to precedent in STF decisions do not follow a
formal standard.
Since a specific lawsuit in Brazil may have multiple decisions related to it, the reference must inform some further element,
temporal or legal, to identify which ruling is being referenced. To do so, the citation usually comes with the legal procedure
identification and the judgment date or the decision’s publication date — or sometimes both. It usually also contains the rapporteur
and the decision type (e.g., merit, injunction, internal appeal).
The legal procedure identification is a number with the format regulated by the Conselho Nacional de Justiça (2009). Still, every
court in Brazil has its identification system, usually composed of a number and the procedure classification according to classes.
The STF alone has 72 different procedural classes. Table 2 presents the complete list of fine-grained entities mapped for precedents.
Put together, this information identifies a unique ruling, even if the case referred to in the citation has multiple decisions. To
illustrate, Fig. 3 shows tags for two different precedents and their inner elements, enough for their accurate identification.

9
10

https://www.lexisnexis.com/en-us/products/lexis/shepards.page Accessed at: 09/20/2020.
https://www.westlaw.com Accessed at: 09/20/2020.
7

Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

F.A. Correia et al.
Table 3
The complete list of fine-grained entities mapped for academic citations.
Fine-grained entity

Type

Description

Title
Collection Title

Text
Text

Author
Co-author
Publisher
Year of Publication

Text
Text
Text
Number

The work published title.
The collection title, if the publication
is part of a collection (e.g., journal
title).
The publication first author.
The publication co-author(s).
The work’s publisher.
Year of publication of the work.

Fig. 5. Example of academic citations. First scenario, when the reference follows the cited work passage.

Fig. 6. Example of academic citations. Second scenario, when the author’s name precedes the cited passage.

However, not all precedent citations have all their inner elements explicitly discriminated. Fig. 4 presents an example. Even in
this incomplete form, however, the citation represents valuable information that can tell us how relevant a given legal procedure
was, is, and will be for the court, as explored by Correia et al. (2019).
4.3.2. The academic citation
An academic citation is a direct citation to a book, book chapter, or journal article. In the STF rulings, its presence is not as
common as the precedents citation or legislative references, but this is by no means a sign of the lesser importance of scholarly
citations in Brazilian law. Instead, it is a result of the types of legal issues brought to the STF, and the court’s strategy in dealing
with the gigantic workload alluded to earlier. An academic publication can provide data, concept definitions, or arguments to support
a ruling. Recently, it became a study object in the legal community where researchers have explored the academic citations in order
to capture the influence of certain authors in the legal debate.
We targeted mentions made within the ruling to published academic works, such as studies, scientific articles, and books, as an
element of judicial reasoning. Thus, we tried to map all and any case where such a mention occurred. Table 3 presents the complete
list of fine-grained entities mapped for the academic citation.
We observed that the citation of academic works mostly follows two styles. Either the reference follows the quote, as illustrated
in Fig. 5, or the author’s name precedes the quote, and the rest of the reference is provided following it, as shown in Fig. 6.
4.3.3. The legislative reference
The legislative reference is a fundamental feature of legal reasoning, consisting of the legal dispositions referenced in each
decision. This court ruling element is even more relevant in a civil law system, where statutory law supports most decisions. We
expect the STF to cite the constitution heavily since the most significant element of its jurisdiction is the constitutional review.
Unlike other coarser entities, it took us time to define the fine-grained entities that could be present in a legislative reference.
After an experimentation (further details in Section 5), we mapped seven entities that are presented in Table 4.
In its shortest form, the citation of a legislative reference may accrue to an indication of a statute or the constitution itself, such
as ‘‘in accordance with the Federal Constitution of 1988’’ where we consider ‘‘Federal Constitution of 1988’’ to be the legal act. Fig. 7
shows a small excerpt of a decision with three different citation styles citation for three different statutes.
8

Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

F.A. Correia et al.
Table 4
The complete list of fine-grained entities identified for legislative references.
Fine-grained entity

Type

Description

Legal Act

Text

The legislative act that was cited (e.g.
Federal or State Constitution, Legal
Statutes).

Institution

Text

When the act is not legislative, such as
regulations or internal rules, which
institution issued it (e.g. STF internal
rules or Federal Reserve resolution).

Origin

Text

The Federation entity that issued
regulation, municipality, state, or the
Union.

Section

Number

The legal act section.

Paragraph

Number

The legal act paragraph.

Subsection

Letter

The legal act subsection.

Clause

Letter

The legal act clause.

Fig. 7. Citations to Legislative References.

4.4. The annotation task
We used two different groups of students for our annotation – one of 54 and the other of 85 students. These students were taking
Courses dedicated to providing law students with Python programming knowledge. This initial cohort of 139 annotators enabled
us to select only the work of those who performed best, discarding poor quality annotations but still retaining a substantially large
dataset. The final annotated corpus used for the tests in this study results from the contribution of only 95 students: 48 from the
first group and 47 from the second. They were selected based on the average inter-annotator agreement measured with Cohen’s
Kappa (further details in Section 5).
We are committed to the use of open-source annotation tools. After exploring various web-based, open-source annotation
solutions, we chose the Doccano project.11 We considered that Doccano struck the best cost-benefit balance for our goals. Every
annotator engaged in the task had their own Doccano account where annotation tasks were automatically assigned. Due to the
tool’s limitations, we split the annotation task into two specific periods. The first was dedicated to annotating the coarse-grained
elements from the ruling excerpts, and the second was oriented toward fine-grained annotation from the previous coarse annotations.
Fig. 8, presents an illustration of the annotation process.
In the first step, all the excerpts were randomly distributed among annotators through Doccano. Also, to assure a similar
workload, each participant received the same amount of excerpts, and every excerpt was delivered to at least two different
annotators. We asked the annotators to tag only the four coarse legal entities in the excerpt in the coarse-grained annotation.
Once completed, all the coarse annotated entities were saved into the database.
In the second step, all unique coarse entities were randomly distributed among students for the fine-grained annotation regardless
of who performed them. Again, every annotator had the same workload. Also, every coarser annotation was delivered to at least
two annotators. In the Doccano interface, these annotations were grouped by types (precedent, academic citation, and legislative
reference). We then asked students to perform the fine-grained annotation.
At the end of the second step, all fine-grained annotations were properly saved in different databases. It is important to state
that equal coarser annotations taken from different excerpts were treated as a single one in the second step. Two annotations will
be considered equals if they have the same sequence of symbols, constituting literal copies. If Annotator X tagged the sequence ‘‘§4◦
do art . 103 - B da CF ’’ as a legislative reference in excerpt 01, and Annotator Y has also tagged the same sequence as a legislative
reference, but in excerpt 02, both sequences will be treated as if they were only one regardless of their origins. As a consequence of
this strategy, we have a natural reduction in the total amount of coarse annotations to be annotated in the second step.

11

https://github.com/doccano/.
9

Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

F.A. Correia et al.

Fig. 8. Annotation task process. (1) excerpts are randomly distributed among annotators for the coarse-grained annotation; (2) - the coarse annotations are
saved into the database and pooled together; (3) - these coarser annotations are randomly distributed among annotators for the fine-grained annotation; and (4)
the fine-grained annotations are saved in a specific database.

All annotations carry a reference to their origins, including the identity of the annotator. Hence, by combining saved data from
the three databases, as presented in Fig. 8, it is possible to reconstruct the excerpt with its coarse and fine-grained annotations.
Nevertheless, that approach cannot guarantee that all the texts presented in the second step will indeed be annotated. The assigned
annotator might refrain from performing a fine-grained annotation for different reasons, e.g., they might have failed to do it within
the deadline, ignored that specific annotation altogether, or encountered a portion of text that was incorrectly identified in the
previous step, such as when a precedent is tagged as a legislative reference.
4.5. Training tasks
In order to build the corpus, we performed two shorter training annotation tasks, followed by a final and long task. During
the whole procedure, follow-up meetings were held to present each phase and to discuss possible difficulties the students might
be encountering. Also, the annotator was allowed to make revisions over their annotations until the end of each step. So they
could consult our team experts and fix possible misunderstandings. Such meetings, along with the inter-rater agreement measured
between phases, played an essential role in improving the guidelines, student annotation performance, and accuracy, resulting in
overall better annotations.
For the training phases, we selected a collection of ten documents: four documents used in the first training task and six in the
second. Every student performed the training tasks over the same collection of excerpts and was given two weeks to conclude each
training task: one week for each annotation step. For these ten documents, experienced researchers produced a golden set from our
team, enabling us to track and compare student annotation performance in the training phase.
For the final task, students were given four weeks to conclude annotations: two weeks for coarse entities and two weeks for
fine-grained entities.
4.6. The inter-annotator agreement
From the very beginning, we closely followed students’ progress, proactively identifying problematic issues that surfaced during
the training tasks and discussing them with annotators at meetings. To do so, we kept an open communication channel with the
annotators throughout, allowing them to share their difficulties and propose guideline improvements. Furthermore, to measure the
evolution of annotations’ quality of, we have used Cohen’s Kappa as an inter-annotator agreement measure.
Cohen’s kappa is one of the most common agreement metrics found in the literature, although it is not without its shortcom|𝐴𝐵|
ings (Krippendorff, 2004). Same as in other studies, Chalkidis et al. (2017) use 𝑚𝑎𝑥(|𝐴|,|𝐵|)
as an inter-annotator agreement measure,
where A and B are sets of contract elements marked by the two annotators, respectively. Wyner et al. (2013) argues against the use
of Cohen’s kappa for problems concerning the annotation span and how such a task is difficult to conceptualize as a classification
task — instead they measure the precision, recall, and F1 measure between annotators.
The conceptualization as a classification task concerns the idea that not annotating something is different from annotating it as
a ‘‘negative example’’ of your standard, which would be needed for the Cohen’s Kappa coefficient. To find out how each of these
alternatives would affect our final results, we decided to compare all three after the annotation task before building the final corpus
presented here. Again, the large number of students participating in the task and the ensuing significant number of total annotations
enabled us to discard thousands of annotations and still be left with a substantially-sized corpus.
In all cases, we expected that most of each excerpt would not be annotated and reflected this assumption in our calculations.
After all, only a fraction of the length of a judicial opinion can be tagged with our entities, regardless if coarse or fine-grained.
As expected, 85.21% of the tokens in the corpus were not annotated. Looking for the overlap between two annotations without
taking this into account might create distortions in all metrics’ result due to highly different marginals and higher agreement than
10

Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

F.A. Correia et al.

Fig. 9. Average of inter-annotator agreement score for different types of annotated text.

expected. As such, we decided to remove all cases where both annotators left the tokens without any tag. This meant we effectively
excluded from our measurements a large number of tokens where both students agreed there was no entity to be marked.
We then calculated the Pearson’s correlation between the Cohen’s Kappa, the F1 measure, and the percentage of agreement on
tokens of all pairs of students at the final task in order to check whether different agreement metrics would render us different
results. We found a correlation of over .9 between them, thus showing that the selection among any of these agreement metrics
itself was not decisive to our results.
5. The annotated corpus
As mentioned before, two groups of students over almost a year performed the annotation task under close supervision. At
introductory meetings, we explained the activity’s academic impact in the legal domain by emphasizing the importance of this
annotated corpus to our study and to other studies that will follow it.
Both groups performed annotations on the same collection of 1363 excerpts. Despite the distribution criteria presented in
Section 4.2, there was no guarantee that every excerpt distributed would indeed be annotated since the number of annotations per
student varied greatly. Unfortunately, with the second group, there were dropouts at the end of the final task, which reduced the
number of effective participation in the fine-grained annotation step to less than half — the only 48% of the participants completed
the fine-grained annotations.
Not all pairs of students had an excerpt in common, which means that the agreement distribution of a given student with the
others does not span everyone else. Each excerpt was annotated on average by 5.4 students.
To build the final corpus presented here, the data annotated by both groups were treated as a single collection. Also, excerpts were
filtered based on who made the annotation by selecting the annotators with average Kappa score above 0.7. We have measured the
average inter-agreement score for every annotator considering four different scenarios: the excerpt annotation and the three types
of fine-grained annotation. As a result, we could take a closer view of the inter-agreement score and how the annotation quality
varies between scenarios. The more frequent the high scores are, the more widespread the understanding of the annotators about
the entities.
The scenario where we had the lowest agreement was the excerpt annotation for coarser entities, as presented in Fig. 9, something
already expected since the coarser annotation demands more effort than the fine-grained annotation performed in the second step. An
excerpt has an average of 16,087 tokens and 55.84 coarser annotations. Meanwhile, a precedent has an average of 10.28 tokens and
3.69 fine-grained annotations. Even so, the fine-grained annotation in precedents seems more difficult than in legislative references,
which in turn, seems more difficult than in academic citations.
With this criterion, we selected what we considered to be the best annotators for each scenario. As a result, Table 5 presents
the number of annotators that passed the criterion. The legislative reference fine-grained annotations were performed only by the
second group.12 In comparison to the other elements, it was the most diverse in structure.
Also, as a result, the amount of annotated data dropped after the filtering.

12 We used the first group annotations (coarser annotations) to understand its format better. We then acted on this knowledge to prepare the fine-grained
annotation format used for the second group.

11

Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

F.A. Correia et al.
Table 5
Selected annotators.

Annotators with Kappa score > .7
Excerpts
Precedents
Academic Citations
Legislative References

67
76
75
28

Table 6
Summary of the count: sentences, tokens, coarse and fine-grained annotations.
Total

Sentences
Tokens
Coarser-grained
Fine-grained

Per excerpt

62,933
1,782,395
33,055
57,573

min

max

average

std

median

3
121
1
0

551
16,087
267
507

105.97
3,000.66
55.65
96.92

81.33
2,501.79
42.44
69.21

93.0
2,692.5
47.0
81.0

Table 7
Coarser-grained entities count.
Legal elements

Per excerpt

Total

With fine-grained

Avg. tokens

Precedents
Acad. Citations
Leg. References
Person

15.33
2.99
17.22
20.11

9,108
1,775
10,229
11,943

8,486 (93.17% )
965 (54.37% )
8,439 (82.50% )
N/A

10.27
24.60
8.41
3.38

5.1. The annotations merge
The presented corpus is the result of the combination of all annotations performed by those different selected annotators. Since
the annotation task has two different types of texts to be annotated, excerpts, and the coarser annotations, the annotation merge
process has two moments. First, the annotation merges per text, regardless of the type, and then, rebuilding the link between the
coarser and fine-grained annotation into one single, and final, representation per excerpt.
The annotation merging strategy employed was majority voting. The label for a word is picked based on whether most annotators
agree with it — for the tiebreaker criterion, we used the vote of the annotator with the highest average inter-annotator agreement
score. As stated before, we have selected the best annotators and reduced the amount of annotated data to ensure a higher quality
of the merging process.
5.2. The corpus
The presented approach’s final result of is a corpus with 595 annotated excerpts, built from 532 decisions — the initial set
contained 1363 excerpts from 764 decisions. Table 6 presents a summary of the count of sentences, tokens, coarse and fine-grained
annotations in the corpus. The variation in size of the excerpt is due to the decision-splitter strategy employed after the decision
selection (see Section 4.2), but also a consequence of the high number of short decisions in the initial set of 750 decisions — 50%
of those were monocratic decisions, which are often very short rulings.
As presented in Table 7, every excerpt has at least one coarser annotation tagged. The most popular coarser element is the person,
followed by the legislative references, and the precedent. The rarest is the academic citation, which is also the element with less
fine-grained annotations: only 54.37% of the occurrences were annotated. Despite the higher inter-annotator agreement (presented
in Fig. 9), a considerable amount of those elements were not annotated by the participants.
The shorter the text, the greater the chances of it being fully annotated. The legislative reference element illustrates this: it is
the smallest text entity, with an average size of 8.42 tokens. As mentioned before, this element’s fine-grained annotation task was
introduced only to the second group, and 28 annotators have contributed to the final corpus. Even so, the legislative reference had
94.05% of the occurrences in corpus annotated with the fine-grained annotations.
The Table 8 shows how diverse is the distribution of fine-grained entities in the corpus. The Reporting Justice (from precedents)
and Legal Act (from Legislative References) are the most popular in the corpus. Meanwhile, entities like Institution and Origin (both
inner elements of Legislative References) are rare in the corpus — only 79 tokens tagged as Institution in the whole corpus.
To better support further research studies using this corpus to test algorithms for legal element extraction, we have also added
part-of-speech (POS) information. Every token from every sentence was tagged with its corresponding POS tag by its context in the
sentence. The POS tagging process was performed with the spaCy13 library for text processing with Python. The corpus generated

13

https://spacy.io/.
12

Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

F.A. Correia et al.
Table 8
Fine-grained Entities count.
Fine-grained entity

Total of tokens

%

Avg. per coarser
annotation

Court
Decision_Date
Decision_Type
Legal_Procedure_Class
Legal_Procedure_Number
Origin
Publication_Date
Reporting_Justice

3154
728
2561
10970
9562
4279
2426
18825

0.18%
0.04%
0.14%
0.62%
0.54%
0.24%
0.14%
1.06%

0.37
0.09
0.30
1.29
1.13
0.50
0.29
2.22

Author
Co-author
Collection_Title
Publisher
Title
Year_of_Publication

3107
493
569
1060
5969
802

0.17%
0.03%
0.03%
0.06%
0.33%
0.04%

3.22
0.51
0.59
1.10
6.19
0.83

Clause
Institution
Legal_Act
Origin
Paragraph
Section
Subsection

608
79
19549
305
2836
7735
2813

0.03%
0.00%
1.10%
0.02%
0.16%
0.43%
0.16%

0.07
0.01
2.32
0.04
0.34
0.92
0.33

Table 9
Example of tagged content with a Precedent.
Sen. ID

Token

POS

Coarser-grained

Fine-grained

9b4f40
9b4f40
9b4f40
9b4f40
9b4f40
9b4f40
9b4f40
9b4f40
9b4f40
9b4f40
9b4f40
9b4f40
9b4f40

;
Inq
2126
,
Relator
Sepúlveda
Pertence
,
Pleno
,
DJe
26.04.2007
.

PUNCT
PROPN
NUM
PUNCT
NOUN
NOUN
NOUN
PUNCT
NOUN
PUNCT
NOUN
NOUN
PUNCT

O
B_Precedent
I_Precedent
I_Precedent
I_Precedent
I_Precedent
I_Precedent
I_Precedent
I_Precedent
I_Precedent
I_Precedent
I_Precedent
O

O
B_Legal_Procedure_Class
B_Legal_Procedure_Number
O
B_Reporting_Justice
B_Reporting_Justice
I_Reporting_Justice
O
B_Court
O
B_Publication_Date
B_Publication_Date
O

Table 10
Example of tagged content with a Legislative Reference.
Sen. ID

Token

POS

Coarser-grained

Fine-grained

efde0c
efde0c
efde0c
efde0c
efde0c
efde0c
efde0c
efde0c
efde0c

no
artigo
175
,
III
da
Constituição
Federal
.

PRON
NOUN
NUM
PUNCT
PROPN
NOUN
NOUN
NOUN
PUNCT

O
B_Legislative_Reference
I_Legislative_Reference
I_Legislative_Reference
I_Legislative_Reference
I_Legislative_Reference
I_Legislative_Reference
I_Legislative_Reference
O

O
O
B_Section
O
B_Subsection
O
B_Legal_Act
I_Legal_Act
O

during this study is available under request,14 where every annotated excerpt is in CSV format. Each line in the file is made of five
columns separated by space, which identify in order: (1) the sentence ID, (2) the token, (3) the POS tag, (4) the coarser-grained
tag, and (5) the fine-grained tag. Tables 9 and 10 presents examples of tagged texts with a Precedent and Legislative Reference,
respectively.
For the coarse and fine-grained entities, the tokens tagged with O are outside of named entities, the B_* prefix tag indicates the
first token of a named entity, and I_* prefix indicates all following tokens of the same entity. Nevertheless, in cases where coarse
entities have no fine-grained annotation, the last column is filled with X, such as in Table 11:

14

The dataset generated during the current study is available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
13

Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

F.A. Correia et al.
Table 11
Example of tagged text when coarse entities has no fine-grained annotation.
Sen. ID

Token

POS

Coarser-grained

Fine-grained

62ef86
62ef86
62ef86
62ef86
62ef86
62ef86
62ef86

da
Resolução
n◦
80
do
CNJ
–

NOUN
NOUN
NOUN
NUM
PROPN
NOUN
PROPN

O
B_Legislative_Reference
I_Legislative_Reference
I_Legislative_Reference
I_Legislative_Reference
I_Legislative_Reference
O

O
X
X
X
X
X
O

6. Experimenting with CRF and with BiLSTM-CRF
To illustrate the potential of the presented corpus, we conducted two experiments for the task of named entity recognition:
with (1) the CRF model (CRF) (Lafferty et al., 2001), and (2) the standard BiLSTM-CRF model (Lample et al., 2016). For the
model evaluation procedure, we follow the CoNLL evaluation schema in requiring an exact match of mention start, end, and entity
type (Tjong Kim Sang, 2002).
6.1. Experiment setup
Since the standard BiLSTM-CRF model cannot handle nested entities, we have implemented a two-step strategy (similarly to the
annotation task procedure). The first step is dedicated only to coarser-entities identifications over a sentence, a trivial use case of
those algorithms. The second step is dedicated only to the fine-grained entity and specialized in it, where we have trained one model
for each type of coarser-grained entity. For instance, to extract fine-grained entities over a Legislative Reference, we have a model
trained solely over annotated fine-grained entities found in the corpus, which had been annotated as Legislative References. In other
words, our corpus was divided into four collections: (1) the complete corpus with coarser-grained tags only, (2) the collections of
legislative references annotations with the fine-grained tags, (3) the collections of precedents annotations with the fine-grained tags,
and (4) the collections of academic citations annotations with the fine-grained tags. As a result, we have four models trained: one
for coarser-grained and three other specifics for fine-grained entities, one for each coarser type.
For the experimental setup, we randomly split the dataset into training and test sets for every implemented model. For the first
step (the coarser-grained entities), 70% of the sentences in the corpus were used for training and 30% for test. We used the same
procedure for the second step but selecting coarser annotations, 70% of the annotations for training and 30% for testing.
It is important to state that the very same coarser entity can be written in different formats and also, have multiple repeated
annotations in the corpus. In our selection process of decisions, we put an extra effort into selecting a very diverse collection of
texts to be annotated (as stated in Section 4.2). Consequently, we expected to reduce the amount of repeated content. During the
whole annotation task, the students were asked to annotate every entity regardless of whether it is a repetition, the same entity
with a different structure, or how many times it appears on the text. We did no direct intervention for the models’ training and test
regarding this matter.
For the CRF models, we used the sklearn-crfsuite15 with a standard configuration and a context window between −2 and +2. We
ran each model 10 times, varying the test and training sets’ samples but maintaining the proportions.
For the BiLSTM-CRF models, we used the Keras16 framework with the keras-contrib17 for the CRF layer. We used the values that
achieved the best results for the first layer hyperparameters according to (Lample et al., 2016). We ran each model with a maximum
number of 10 epochs. Also, We used a pre-trained embedding, a word2vec model trained with 200 thousand decisions,18 regardless
of its origins or type (monocratic or collegiate). With that, we expected to improve the model’s capacity of generalization and the
results reliability.
6.2. Experiment results
As presented earlier, the performed experiments mimic the annotations task procedure. For the experiment’s second step, the
models’ input was limited to the coarser-grained annotation — the sequence of tokens previously annotated as a coarser entity.19
A different approach would be to use the first step output as input for the second step. However, this approach would impact the
quality measurements of the second step’s model due to the error propagation from the previous step. This approach is much closer
to a real scenario of using these models, but we decided to limit the context and focus on the corpus evaluation throughout the
experiments.

15

www.sklearn-crfsuite.readthedocs.io.
https://keras.io/.
17 https://github.com/keras-team/keras-contrib.
18 These decisions were randomly selected from our collection of decisions published by the STF between 2009 and 2018.
19 We tried using the entire sentence as context, but the result was considerably lower in quality for the BiLSTM, where the average weighted precision for
academic citations dropped from 0.84 to 0.70. For the CRF models, the change seemed to render no relevant differences. Therefore, we have opted to not further
explore this option to avoid a long discussion with the same results.
16

14

Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

F.A. Correia et al.
Table 12
Precision, recall and F1 for the models trained for coarser-grained entities.
CRF

Precedent
Acad. Citation
Leg. Reference
Person
Total

BiLSTM-CRF

Precision

Recall

F1

Precision

Recall

F1

0.93
0.94
0.93
0.90
0.93

0.87
0.85
0.90
0.85
0.87

0.90
0.90
0.91
0.88
0.90

0.89
0.90
0.90
0.85
0.89

0.91
0.90
0.93
0.84
0.91

0.90
0.91
0.91
0.85
0.90

Fig. 10. Normalized Confusion Matrices, CRF model for coarser-grained entities .

6.2.1. Classifying coarser-grained entities
For the coarse-grained entities, both models had similar results. Table 12 presents a summary of the metrics grouped by entities,
each value is the weighted average of the metric regarding the classification of the beginning and intermediary tags (‘B_*’ and ‘I_*’
tags) of each entity.
The CRF models reached the highest precision but suffered from a lower recall, unlike the BiLSTM-CRF that had better recall
values. The F1 of both models performed comparably, except for academic citations where the BiLSTM-CRF outperforms, and for
person identification where the CRF gave a better result. To verify the significance of the both models performance, we have
performed the 5x2cv combined F test procedure to compare both algorithm’s performance (Alpaydin, 1999). The p-value returned
was smaller than 0.005, thus we reject the null hypothesis indicating that there is a significant difference between the two models’
performance.20
The confusion matrices presented in Figs. 10 and 11, provides a detailed description of both models’ errors. For both models, we
have similar error scenarios: both had difficulties identifying the start of the named entity, especially with the entities ‘Person’ and
‘Academic Citation’, where the BiLSTM-CRF had more troubles than the CRF. In contrast, the CRF made more mistakes confusing
named entities with ‘O’, the outside entity. A possible justification is that the pre-trained embedding gave the BiLSTM-CRF a better
ability to distinguish the named entities from outsiders. We believe that this error may be related to the annotator’s difficulty
identifying the boundaries of some complex entities’ citations. However, for both models, the entity ‘Person’ had a significant
number of misclassification as ‘O’. Our best guess is that most of these cases are related to the rarity of words — uncommon names
or misspelled names. For the BiLSTM, 46% of these cases are related to words not present in the vocabulary of the pre-trained
word2vec.

20 In fact, we have performed two tests. Since the tag ‘O’ (outside) is much more common than any other tag, the first test includes all occurrences of the
outside tag and, in the second test, we have excluded cases where the real and the predicted output were both outsiders. For both scenarios the returned 𝑝-value
was smaller than 0,05 (0,000059 and 0,000001, respectively).

15

Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

F.A. Correia et al.

Fig. 11. Normalized Confusion Matrices, BiLSTM-CRF model for coarser-grained entities .

Table 13
Precision, recall and F1 for the models trained for Precedent’s fine-grained entities.
CRF

Court
Decision_Date
Decision_Type
Legal_Procedure
_Class
Legal_Procedure
_Number
Origin
Publication_Date
Reporting_Justice

BiLSTM-CRF

Precision

Recall

F1

Precision

Recall

F1

0.85
0.84
0.91
0.98

0.71
0.69
0.90
0.97

0.78
0.75
0.90
0.98

0.66
0.86
0.78
0.93

0.65
0.52
0.78
0.95

0.65
0.61
0.78
0.94

0.97

0.96

0.97

0.89

0.92

0.90

0.99
0.90
0.90

0.99
0.85
0.87

0.99
0.87
0.88

0.95
0.74
0.74

0.95
0.83
0.88

0.95
0.77
0.80

Table 14
Precision, recall and F1 for the models trained for Academic Citation’s fine-grained entities.
CRF

Author
Co_author
Collection_Title
Non_author
Publisher
Title
Year_of_Publication

BiLSTM-CRF

Precision

Recall

F1

Precision

Recall

F1

0.95
0.92
0.88
0.78
0.93
0.96
0.98

0.96
0.84
0.73
0.42
0.93
0.96
0.97

0.96
0.88
0.79
0.54
0.93
0.96
0.97

0.82
0.40
1.00
0.00
0.78
0.88
0.94

0.90
0.22
0.09
0.00
0.62
0.90
0.88

0.85
0.28
0.18
0.00
0.68
0.89
0.91

6.2.2. Classifying finer-grained entities
For the fine-grained entities, the CRF model outperformed the BiLSTM-CRF in every aspect. Tables 13–15 presents the model
metrics grouped by entities (similar to Table 12). For that second step, we have a very limited context — only words and entities
related to one type of coarser annotation. It seems that the CRF uses it better than the BiLSTM. The CRF could also overcome the low
number of fine-grained entities tagged in the academic citations, where the most popular entity is present in 0.03% of the tokens
in the whole corpus.
The detailed error description for the precedents’ fine-grained entities classification (presented in Figs. 12 and 13) shows that
the error is closely related to the entities rarity. Both models have struggled with rare intermediary tags like ‘I_Decision_Date’ and
‘I_Publication_Date’. A justification for this is that in the corpus is much more common the date citation in its simplified form,
one single token (Day–Month–Year with leading zeros). Even so, the CRF model outperformed the BiLSTM-CRF. An interesting
16

Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

F.A. Correia et al.

Table 15
Precision, recall and F1 for the models trained for Legislative Reference’s fine-grained entities.
CRF

Clause
Institution
Legal_Act
Origin
Paragraph
Section
Subsection

BiLSTM-CRF

Precision

Recall

F1

Precision

Recall

F1

0.96
0.21
0.97
0.79
0.87
0.98
0.98

0.95
0.06
0.99
0.68
0.83
0.98
0.98

0.95
0.09
0.98
0.72
0.85
0.98
0.98

0.88
0.00
0.96
0.88
0.86
0.98
0.94

0.94
0.00
0.97
0.37
0.80
0.98
0.97

0.90
0.00
0.96
0.51
0.83
0.98
0.96

Fig. 12. Normalized Confusion Matrices, CRF model for Precedent’s Fine-grained Entities.

point about the BiLSTM-CRF is that it had a better performance with identifications of the ‘Court’ entity, probably an effect of the
pre-trained ‘word2vec’.
For legislative References, we have a very similar scenario to the precedents but the worst performance of the BiLSTM-CRF (see
Figs. 14 and 15). The most frequent error was the misclassification of the ‘Institution’ entity as ‘Legal Act’. ‘Institution’ is also one
of the rarest entities in the corpus (as presented in Table 8).
The academic citations’ fine-grained entities recognition was the most challenging classification due to the complexity of the
nature of the entity (larger entity with diverse vocabulary) and the entity rarity. As a result, the CRF model outperformed the
BiLSTM-CRF by far, see Figs. 16 and 17. Its most common error was the misclassification of the ‘Co-author’ and ‘Non-author’
entities, which rare entities and also related to very similar content: persons’ names and roles — same issue observed with the
‘Person’ coarser entity. The BiLSTM got lost in the classification process. Our best guess is that the CRF got the advantage of the
limited context of the input data (limited to the coarser annotated entity) while the BiLSTM had struggled to define and correlate
contexts of use and classes.
7. Conclusions and future work
In this paper, we presented a case study on the fine-grained annotation task of legal decisions performed by law students as
annotators. The annotation task was conducted as part of the coursework for two disciplines focused on technology: ‘‘Computer
Programming for Lawyers’’ and ‘‘Legal Data Science’’. Our primary motivation was to involve the students in practical applications
of technology for legal innovation. We also took a step further, building the most extensive corpus known in Portuguese dedicated
for legal named entity recognition.
The approach presented for the annotation task had a particular concern with the annotator workload, avoiding turning the task
into a burden by not competing for the student’s attention with other course activities. Even so, we observed that the workload
could be lower, with a smaller set of text to be annotated, the excerpts could be even smaller, and with a better distribution of
coarser annotations for fine-grained annotation.
17

Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

F.A. Correia et al.

Fig. 13. Normalized Confusion Matrices, BiLSTM-CRF model for Precedent’s Fine-grained Entities.

Fig. 14. Normalized Confusion Matrices, CRF model for Legislative Reference’s Fine-grained Entities.

A prior selection of coarser annotation can significantly improve the fine-grained annotation step. Observing the inter-annotator
agreement after the coarse-grained annotation, we were able to select the most qualified coarser annotations for the fine-grained
annotation, avoiding unnecessary work and reducing the workload at this stage. The fine-grained annotation quality can also be
improved by reducing the number of entities annotated, which can be accomplished by ignoring very rare entities. An example is the
‘subsection’ entity for fine-grain annotation of legislative references, present in less than 4% of the annotated legislative references.
Also, the fine-grained annotation could be improved with a label suggestion tool based on a pattern-matching strategy (e.g., to
suggest legal procedure numbers and class) where the annotator could accept or not the suggestion. The pattern-matching approach
can produce a good result for the extraction of simple precedent citations (only the references to previous legal procedures and its
number). Our results showed that 93% of the precedent citations have the legal procedure class followed by the legal procedure
number — following a pattern similar to the one described in Section 4.1. However, only 22% of the annotated precedents citations
do not have other fine-grained information, 78% also have other fine-grained entities, and 43% have at least 4 fine-grained entities.
18

Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

F.A. Correia et al.

Fig. 15. Normalized Confusion Matrices, BiLSTM-CRF model for Legislative Reference’s Fine-grained Entities.

Fig. 16. Normalized Confusion Matrices, CRF model for Academic Citation’s Fine-grained Entities.

We have an even more difficult scenario for this type of strategy regarding the recognition of the other coarser-grained entities. We
have a gamut of different writing patterns for legislative references and an even more complex scenario for academic citations.
The corpus presented is in its first version. Still, we hope to improve it with future annotations tasks with the collaboration of
law students and focus on other Brazilian courts’ rulings.
The experiments presented show the potential of the corpus to support further studies and data enhancements. Since the
majority of the STF’s decisions are available on Internet, the entities extraction means add another level of valuable and structured
information over the text. Future works can get a better result with pre-trained embedding models for word and text conversion,
like BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers) (Devlin et al., 2019) and the BERTimbau (a BERT model for
Portuguese) (Carmo et al., 2020).
The main contributions of this study are both methodological and substantive. From a methodological perspective, we have
conducted a groundbreaking experiment in large-scale annotation tasks integrating both teaching and research in legal technology.
19

Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

F.A. Correia et al.

Fig. 17. Normalized Confusion Matrices, BiLSTM-CRF model for Academic Citation’s Fine-grained Entities.

On the one hand, over a hundred law students with prior training in programming acquired knowledge and experience on practical
aspects of machine learning that are crucial for understanding public policy about artificial intelligence. On the substantive side,
the resulting dataset is unprecedented in size, considering manually annotated sets in the legal domain in Portuguese. Lastly, it
has enabled the training of models that would allow the accurate extraction, from court rulings, of entities that are central to
legal reasoning and argumentation. The STF itself has, until this date, not been able to produce such metadata about its decisions.
Therefore, even from a merely substantive point of view, the findings achieved in this study represent a significant contribution to
the Brazilian legal system, the legal community, and any other interested in exploring this knowledge.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Fernando A. Correia: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft. Alexandre A.A. Almeida:
Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. José Luiz Nunes: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. Kaline G. Santos: Data
curation, Investigation, Validation. Ivar A. Hartmann: Conceptualization, Resources, Methodology, Supervision. Felipe A. Silva:
Investigation, Software. Hélio Lopes: Methodology, Supervision.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the Getulio Vargas Foundation (FGV), Brazil, the National Council for Scientific and Technological
Development (CNPq), Brazil and Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior – Brasil (CAPES) – Finance Code
001.
References
Alpaydin, E. (1999). Combined 5 x 2 cv F test for comparing supervised classification learning algorithms. Neural Computation, 11(8), 1885–1892. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1162/089976699300016007, URL: http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/11/8/1885/814248/089976699300016007.pdf.
Carmo, D., Piau, M., Campiotti, I., Nogueira, R., & Lotufo, R. (2020). PTT5: Pretraining and validating the T5 model on Brazilian Portuguese data.
Chalkidis, I., Androutsopoulos, I., & Aletras, N. (2020). Neural legal judgment prediction in English. In ACL 2019 - 57th annual meeting of the association for
computational linguistics, proceedings of the conference (pp. 4317–4323). Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/p191424, URL: https://www.echr.coe.
Chalkidis, I., Androutsopoulos, I., & Michos, A. (2017). Extracting contract elements. In Proceedings of the international conference on artificial intelligence and
law (pp. 19–28). New York, New York, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3086512.3086515, URL: http://dl.acm.org/
citation.cfm?doid=3086512.3086515.
20

Information Processing and Management 59 (2022) 102794

F.A. Correia et al.

Conselho Nacional de Justiça (2009). Resolução No 65 de 16/12/2008: DJE/CNJ No 02/2009, (pp. 2–27). URL: https://atos.cnj.jus.br/atos/detalhar/119.
Correia, F. A., Nunes, J. L., De Almeida, G. F., Almeida, A. A., & Lopes, H. (2019). An exploratory analysis of precedent relevance in the Brazilian supreme
court rulings. In Proceedings of the ACM symposium on document engineering (pp. 1–4). New York, New York, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Inc,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3342558.3345416, URL: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=3342558.3345416.
Dadgosari, F., Guim, M., Beling, P. A., Livermore, M. A., & Rockmore, D. N. (2020). Modeling law search as prediction. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 1–32.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10506-020-09261-5.
de Araujo, P. H., de Campos, T. E., Ataides Braz, F., & da Silva, N. (2020). VICTOR: a dataset for Brazilian legal documents classification. In Proceedings of the
12th language resources and evaluation conference (pp. 1449–1458). Marseille, France: European Language Resources Association, URL: https://www.aclweb.
org/anthology/2020.lrec-1.181.
de Souza, J. J., & Finger, M. (2020). Robust ranking of Brazilian Supreme Court decisions. In R. Cerri, & R. C. Prati (Eds.), Intelligent systems (pp. 581–594).
Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Devlin, J., Chang, M. W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2019). BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In NAACL HLT
2019 - 2019 conference of the north american chapter of the association for computational linguistics: Human language technologies - proceedings of the conference,
Vol. 1 (pp. 4171–4186). Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), URL: https://github.com/tensorflow/tensor2tensor.
Falcão, J., Góes, S. B. C., Hartmann, I., & Almeida, G. F. C. F. (2019). A Realidade do Supremo Criminal: Technical report, Rio de Janeiro: FGV Direito Rio, URL:
http://bibliotecadigital.fgv.br/dspace/handle/10438/27510.
Freitas, C., Mota, C., Santos, D., Oliveira, H. G., & Carvalho, P. (2010). Second HAREM: Advancing the state of the art of named entity recognition in Portuguese.
In Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (pp. 3630–3637). Valletta, Malta: European Language Resources
Association (ELRA), URL: http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2010/pdf/412_Paper.pdf.
Galgani, F., Compton, P., & Hoffmann, A. (2015). LEXA: Building knowledge bases for automatic legal citation classification. Expert Systems with Applications,
42(17–18), 6391–6407. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2015.04.022.
Höfler, S., & Piotrowski, M. (2011). Building corpora for the philological study of Swiss legal texts. Journal for Language Technology and Computational Linguistics,
26(2), 77–89, URL: http://www.zora.uzh.ch/54761/.
Ji, D., Tao, P., Fei, H., & Ren, Y. (2020). An end-to-end joint model for evidence information extraction from court record document. Information Processing and
Management, 57(6), Article 102305. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2020.102305.
Kanapala, A., Pal, S., & Pamula, R. (2019). Text summarization from legal documents: a survey. Artificial Intelligence Review, 51(3), 371–402. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/s10462-017-9566-2.
Krippendorff, K. (2004). Reliability in content analysis. Human Communication Research, 30(3), 411–433. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2958.2004.tb00738.x,
URL: https://academic.oup.com/hcr/article/30/3/411-433/4331534.
Lafferty, J. D., McCallum, A., & Pereira, F. C. N. (2001). Conditional random fields: Probabilistic models for segmenting and labeling sequence data. In Proceedings
of the eighteenth international conference on machine learning (pp. 282–289). San Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc..
Lample, G., Ballesteros, M., Subramanian, S., Kawakami, K., & Dyer, C. (2016). Neural architectures for named entity recognition. In 2016 conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human language technologies, NAACL HLT 2016 - Proceedings of the conference (pp. 260–270).
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/n16-1030, URL: https://github.com/.
Leibon, G., Livermore, M., Harder, R., Riddell, A., & Rockmore, D. (2018). Bending the law: geometric tools for quantifying influence in the multinetwork of
legal opinions. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 26(2), 145–167. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10506-018-9224-2.
Leitner, E., Rehm, G., & Moreno-Schneider, J. (2019). Fine-grained named entity recognition in legal documents. In LNCS: vol. 11702, Lecture notes in computer
science (Including subseries Lecture notes in artificial intelligence and lecture notes in bioinformatics) (pp. 272–287). Springer, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3030-33220-4{_}20.
Luz de Araujo, P. H., de Campos, T. E., de Oliveira, R. R., Stauffer, M., Couto, S., & Bermejo, P. (2018). LeNER-Br: A dataset for named entity recognition
in Brazilian legal text. In LNAI: vol. 11122, Lecture notes in computer science (Including subseries Lecture notes in artificial intelligence and lecture notes in
bioinformatics) (pp. 313–323). Springer Verlag, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-99722-3{_}32.
Medvedeva, M., Vols, M., & Wieling, M. (2020). Using machine learning to predict decisions of the European Court of Human Rights. Artificial Intelligence and
Law, 28(2), 237–266. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10506-019-09255-y, URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10506-019-09255-y.
Merchant, K., & Pande, Y. (2018). NLP based latent semantic analysis for legal text summarization. In 2018 international conference on advances in computing,
communications and informatics (pp. 1803–1807). Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICACCI.2018.8554831.
Pereira, T., Arguelhes, D. W., & Almeida, G. F. C. F. (2020). Quem decide no Supremo?: Technical report, Rio de Janeiro: FGV Direito Rio, URL: http:
//bibliotecadigital.fgv.br/dspace/handle/10438/29679.
Ringland, N., Dai, X., Hachey, B., Karimi, S., Paris, C., & Curran, J. R. (2019). NNE: A dataset for nested named entity recognition in English newswire. In
ACL 2019 - 57th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, proceedings of the conference (pp. 5176–5181). Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL), URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.01359.
Silva, J. A., Ferreira, G. V., & Prata, A. A. (2019). Desempenho em Juizados Especiais no Brasil: uma análise do período 2009–2016. Revista de Estudos Empíricos
em Direito, 6(3), 231–250. http://dx.doi.org/10.19092/reed.v6i3.349, URL: https://reedrevista.org/reed/article/view/349.
Supremo Tribunal Federal (2020). Relatório de atividades 2019: Technical report, Brasilia: Supremo Tribunal Federal, URL: http://www.stf.jus.br/arquivo/cms/
centralDoCidadaoAcessoInformacaoGestaoEstrategica/anexo/2020_01_24_13.08_RelatoriodeAtividades2019_completo.pdf.
Tjong Kim Sang, E. F. (2002). Introduction to the CoNLL-2002 shared task. In Proceeding of the 6th conference on natural language learning, Vol. 20 (pp. 1–4).
Morristown, NJ, USA: Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), http://dx.doi.org/10.3115/1118853.1118877, URL: http://portal.acm.org/citation.
cfm?doid=1118853.1118877.
Veçoso, F. F. C., Pereira, B. R., Perruso, C. A., Marinho, C. M., Babinski, D. B. d. O., Wang, D. W. L., Berrini, E. W., De Palma, J. B., & Salinas, N. S. C. (2014).
A Pesquisa em Direito e as Bases Eletrônicas de Julgados dos Tribunais: matrizes de análise e aplicação no Supremo Tribunal Federal e no Superior Tribunal
de Justiça. Revista de Estudos Empíricos em Direito, 1(1), 105–139. http://dx.doi.org/10.19092/reed.v1i1.10, URL: http://www.cnj.jus.
Wyner, A., Peters, W., & Katz, D. (2013). A case study on legal case annotation. In Frontiers in artificial intelligence and applications, Vol. 259 (pp. 165–174).
http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/978-1-61499-359-9-165, URL: https://cronfa.swan.ac.uk/Record/cronfa50696.

21

