IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 29, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

3105

LegalVis: Exploring and Inferring Precedent
Citations in Legal Documents
Lucas E. Resck , Jean R. Ponciano , Luis Gustavo Nonato , Member, IEEE, and
Jorge Poco , Member, IEEE
Abstract—To reduce the number of pending cases and conflicting rulings in the Brazilian Judiciary, the National Congress amended the
Constitution, allowing the Brazilian Supreme Court (STF) to create binding precedents (BPs), i.e., a set of understandings that both
Executive and lower Judiciary branches must follow. The STF’s justices frequently cite the 58 existing BPs in their decisions, and it is of
primary relevance that judicial experts could identify and analyze such citations. To assist in this problem, we propose LegalVis, a web-based
visual analytics system designed to support the analysis of legal documents that cite or could potentially cite a BP. We model the problem of
identifying potential citations (i.e., non-explicit) as a classification problem. However, a simple score is not enough to explain the results; that
is why we use an interpretability machine learning method to explain the reason behind each identified citation. For a compelling visual
exploration of documents and BPs, LegalVis comprises three interactive visual components: the first presents an overview of the data
showing temporal patterns, the second allows filtering and grouping relevant documents by topic, and the last one shows a document’s text
aiming to interpret the model’s output by pointing out which paragraphs are likely to mention the BP, even if not explicitly specified. We
evaluated our identification model and obtained an accuracy of 96%; we also made a quantitative and qualitative analysis of the results. The
usefulness and effectiveness of LegalVis were evaluated through two usage scenarios and feedback from six domain experts.
Index Terms—Legal documents, visual analytics, Brazilian legal system, natural language processing

Ç
1

INTRODUCTION

T

HE Brazilian Supreme Court (Supremo Tribunal Federal

(STF) in Portuguese) is the highest court of law in Brazil.
It is primarily responsible for guarding the rights in the Brazilian Constitution. There are eleven justices, nominated by
the President and confirmed by the Senate. Among its multiple attributions, STF can provide a final judgment on
appeals from other courts and a judicial review on some
norms created in the country.
In 2004, Brazil had more than 100 million pending cases
in the Judiciary [1]. To reduce those numbers and avoid conflicting decisions, the National Congress amended the Constitution that same year, allowing STF to create binding
precedents (S
umulas Vinculantes in Portuguese). These





Lucas E. Resck and Jean R. Ponciano are with Fundaç~
ao Getulio Vargas,
Rio de Janeiro 22250-900, Brazil. E-mail: lucas.domingues@fgv.edu.br,
jean.ponciano@fgv.br.
Luis Gustavo Nonato is with ICMC-USP, S~
ao Carlos 13566-590, Brazil.
E-mail: gnonato@icmc.usp.br.
Jorge Poco is with Fundaç~
ao Getulio Vargas, Rio de Janeiro 22250-900,
Brazil, and also with Universidad Cat
olica San Pablo, Arequipa 04001,
Per
u. E-mail: jorge.poco@fgv.br.

Manuscript received 20 September 2021; revised 3 February 2022; accepted 8
February 2022. Date of publication 18 February 2022; date of current version
8 May 2023.
This work was supported in part by CNPq-Brazil under Grants #303552/
2017-4 and #312483/2018-0, in part by Rio de Janeiro State Funding Agency
(FAPERJ)—Brazil under Grant #E-26/201.424/2021, in part by S~
ao Paulo
Research Foundation (FAPESP)—Brazil under Grant #2013/07375-0, and
the School of Applied Mathematics at Fundaç~
ao Getulio Vargas (FGV).
(Corresponding author: Lucas E. Resck.)
Recommended for acceptance by M. Sedlmair.
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at https://doi.
org/10.1109/TVCG.2022.3152450, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier no. 10.1109/TVCG.2022.3152450

precedents consolidate understandings on judicial issues
that both Executive and lower Judiciary branches must follow. From 2004 to 2020, the Court ruled 58 of those precedents, covering some of the most critical discussions from
crime to tax law [2]. For example, binding precedent 37
addresses the issue of salaries of public servants and has the
following statement: “It is not up to the Judiciary, which has no
legislative function, to increase the salaries of public servants, on
the grounds of isonomy.” At first, the intention was to end the
controversy. Still, the STF ends up later resolving thousands
of cases that present a divergence on the application of a
binding precedent (BP). Consequently, STF’s justices regularly cite these binding precedents in their decisions.
We consider a decision as a justice’s ruling on a particular legal case, written and published on a legal document
afterward. The terms “decision” and “legal document” are
used interchangeably in this paper. Given the large number
of decisions in STF — more than 1 million from 2011 to 2020
[3]—, lawyers and other judicial experts face difficulties
finding citations to BPs and analyzing them. Such difficulties arise from the lack of a computational tool to help the
experts to find, for instance, decisions that cite a particular
BP of interest. Moreover, it is usual to have decisions with
hundreds of pages, making it hard for lawyers and other
experts to find parts of interest where justices cite, quote, or
implicitly mention a BP.
We worked alongside a domain expert to address these
challenges to develop a web-based visual analytic tool named
LegalVis. We designed this system to explore and analyze the
texts of STF’s legal documents, particularly their explicit or
implicit relationships with binding precedents. In contrast to
an explicit citation to a BP, which can be easily found by
searching “Binding Precedent #X” (in free translation) in the

1077-2626 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See ht_tps://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 12:52:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 29, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

document’s content, finding potential citations to a BP is not a
straightforward task. To tackle this issue, LegalVis relies on a
machine learning model to identify potential citations, building upon an interpretability mechanism to provide reliable
explanations for the model’s decisions. This system also provides mechanisms for quickly identifying documents and
BPs of interest through multiple linked views and interactive
tools. These features permit easy analysis of the content of
the documents and, at the same time, allow us to interpret
the relationships that exist between similar documents and
their relation with the BPs. We demonstrate the potential of
LegalVis through two usage scenarios that show insightful
and relevant findings. Our usage scenarios were validated by
six domain experts not involved in the system’s development, who also outlined the usefulness and potential of
LegalVis.
Both components in LegalVis, the potential citation identification model and the visual analytics tool, could be
applied to any court within the judicial system. We have
chosen to deal with STF’s decisions due to their relevance in
the national context. Our main contributions are:





2

A pipeline for the identification of potential (i.e.,
non-explicit) citations that relies on (i) a machine
learning model and (ii) an interpretability mechanism that provides reliable explanations for the model’s decisions. Properly handling legal data,
especially non-English data, is a sensitive task by its
nature. Our pipeline and obtained results benefit
this application domain and may inspire other
applications.
LegalVis, a visual analytics system that assists lawyers and other judicial experts in exploring legal
documents and binding precedents.
Two usage scenarios, validated by six domain
experts not involved in the system’s development,
showing relevant judicial findings concerning STF’s
decisions.

RELATED WORK

In this paper, we are interested in identifying and analyzing
decisions somehow related to binding precedents, either by
explicitly citing or implicitly mentioning them. In this context, a crucial step is to compute and visualize the similarity
between the binding precedent and parts of a legal document. In the following, we discuss related research under
two perspectives: visualization of similarities between parts
of documents and works related to legal documents
analysis.

2.1

Visualizing Similarities Between Parts of
Documents
Several text visualization techniques have been proposed
for many tasks, domains, and data types. We point the
reader to the surveys by Alharbi and Laramee [4] and by
Kucher and Kerren [5] for a broader understanding of this
topic.
One particular category of techniques focuses on visualizing document-level similarity, which is generally achieved
by representing documents as points in a 2D or 3D

visualization plane and positioning them accordingly [6],
[7], [8]. Rather than just knowing whether two documents
are similar to each other, one may be interested in exploring
similarity at a fragment-level, i.e., by visually comparing
parts (or fragments) of documents (e.g., paragraphs or sentences) to a reference text and highlighting their similarities.
A high similarity between the two parts is expected when
there is text repetition, which is one of the text reuse possibilities [9]. Still, even parts that do not share many words
may be similar to each other depending on the underlying
semantics [10]. Either way, a visual analysis of these similar
parts’ contents is helpful in various contexts, as in tasks
related to technical writing [11] and plagiarism identification [12], [13]. Examples include PicaPica [13], a visual analytic tool that highlights differences and commonalities
between two documents to help users in detecting plagiarism, and the Text Re-use Browser [14], which highlights
pairs of similar sentences of the Bible via a dot plot matrix.
Different visualization techniques support the comparison between documents at a fragment-level, from gridbased heatmaps [14], [15] to side-by-side views [13]. They
usually fall into one of two basic categories depending on
the level of details on the raw text they provide [16]: while
close reading techniques allow the analysis of the text itself
(words, phrases, ideas, and so on — see, e.g., Text Re-use
Reader [14]), distant reading techniques1 generate abstract
representations that summarize the texts’ information (see,
e.g., Compare Cloud [18] and ViTA [15]). As stated by J€
anicke
et al. [16], hybrid strategies that guide users from distant to
close reading (top-down approach) successfully apply the
well-established visual
information-seeking
mantra
“overview first, zoom and filter, then details-on-demand” [19].
Visual analytic tools usually rely on linked views to accomplish hybrid visualizations. One such example is the system
proposed by Kiesel et al. to compare argument structures in
essays [20].
Our approach computes syntactic and semantic similarities (for explicit and potential citations, respectively)
between parts of a document and the binding precedent
being cited. To show such similarities intuitively and effectively, we rely on a hybrid approach that allows both distant
and close readings in a top-down manner. Contrary to the
mentioned systems, LegalVis is designed to handle Brazilian legal documents and particularities. We discuss studies
related to the analysis of legal documents in the following
section.
Finally, different visual encoding strategies may be
employed to optimize the analysis of similar parts’ contents
when in close reading. One such choice is the use of colors
(in the background or font color) to indicate common words
or shared ideas [13]. Other possibilities include changes in
the font size, connections, and glyphs [16]. LegalVis
employs the first option.

2.2 Legal Documents Analysis
In common law countries, such as the United States and
Australia, lawyers and other judicial experts often search
1. Close reading and distant reading are terms first created to categorize visualization techniques applied to digital humanities [17].

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 12:52:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RESCK ET AL.: LEGALVIS: EXPLORING AND INFERRING PRECEDENT CITATIONS IN LEGAL DOCUMENTS

for precedents, looking at how old decisions could help
solve open cases [21]. In this context, automated text processing becomes a valuable tool that allows these professionals to search and analyze legal documents [22], [23],
especially when the task of interest involves finding relevant precedents or similar decisions [24], [25].
Given the many benefits of visual analytics, some authors
have created visualization tools to help users explore such a
high amount of legal data. An example is Knowlex [26], a
visual analytic system that links and exhibits Italian legal
documents from different sources related to the user’s law
of interest. By employing citation networks, EUCaseNet [27]
allows one to visually explore citations involving judgments
from the European Court of Justice through network structural properties that will enable, e.g., recognizing relevant
precedents and judges’ behaviors. Visualizations applied to
other countries’ legal data also exist, for example, in Netherlands [28] and Portugal [29].
Despite advances in the development of visual frameworks to assist in legal documents analysis, users are still
challenged in exploring and visualizing legal data in Brazil.
The Brazilian courts’ websites and other official platforms
usually exhibit copious pages of results, each containing several and long decisions [22]. A few efforts have been made to
enhance the visualization of these data. One of them is the
Supremo 2.0 system [30], a tool designed to visualize STF’s
quantitative and multidimensional data. By working with a
dataset similar to ours, Gomez-Nieto et al. [31] proposed a
visual analytic tool that allows exploring case-related aggregated information from STF through different representations (e.g., stacked graphs, treemaps, and heatmaps).
Our approach addresses a challenge not pursued by any
other tool, even though some of them have characteristics in
common with ours, such as linked views or the use of STF’s
data. LegalVis’s primary goal is to provide a compelling
exploration of legal documents that explicitly or potentially
cite binding precedents. This involves an effective visualization and suitable machine learning and interpretability
methods to identify and explain potential (non-explicit) citations. Not even those studies that also rely on STF’s
data [30], [31] consider this type of citation information in
their work.
Other Tools and Search Engines. Various platforms developed search engines for legal documents and jurisprudence.
In Brazil, Buscador Dizer o Direito [32] presents commented
documents, although the number of commentaries may be
considered small, and OAB Juris [33] uses artificial intelligence algorithms to present more relevant results. Other
Brazilian platforms include JusBrasil [34] and LexML [35]. In
the Netherlands, Bluetick [36] offers suggestions and similarity concepts during the search. In general, however, these
platforms do not offer efficient visualization or natural language processing (NLP) algorithms that could improve
results and time during a user’s search. Some other tools are
more elaborate, offering solutions based on analytics, visualization, machine learning, digitalization, and process
automation. In Brazil, Finch Platform [37] and Legal One [38]
are some of the most known tools, and, in United States,
there are Lexis [39], Westlaw [40], and Casetext [41]. The last
one, in particular, allows the use of Transformer-based
models [42] to search for case laws that are similar to given

3107

sentences. As stated, none of these tools and search engines
meets LegalVis’s objectives.

3

SYSTEM OVERVIEW

After several weekly meetings with a domain expert, we
identified the challenges behind exploring legal documents
and binding precedents. We characterize a set of questions/
requirements to be addressed by the analytical tool. We present the system’s requirements and the concrete visualization
tasks that guided our visual design throughout this section.
We also provide an overview of the system’s workflow.

3.1 System Requirements
After elucidating the domain experts’ needs, we came up
with several questions grouped into three categories.
The first category comprises questions related to the
identification of decisions that cite or could potentially cite
a binding precedent:
Q1.1. Which decisions in the STF (overall, per justice rapporteur, and type of decision) explicitly cite a specific binding precedent?
Q1.2. Which decisions in the STF (overall, per justice rapporteur, and type of decision) could potentially cite a specific binding precedent? In other words, which decisions
end up citing a particular binding precedent in a nonexplicit manner?
Q1.3. Are there decisions related to a to-be-created binding precedent?
The second category of questions are related to the filtering and analysis of relevant decisions:
Q2.1 Which decisions cite a specific binding precedent on
a given date?
Q2.2. Given a date, are there similar decisions that cite
the same binding precedent?
Q2.3. Which are the most relevant decisions among those
that cite a specific binding precedent on a given date regarding the similarity between binding precedent and decision?
Finally, the third category of questions addresses issues
related to the similarity between parts of decisions and BPs
and the relevance of those parts:
Q3.1. How similar is each part of a decision to the corresponding binding precedent?
Q3.2. Which parts of a decision cite or are likely to cite a
specific binding precedent?
Q3.3. Given many decisions, can one quickly access multiple decisions of interest and their relevant parts when analyzing different dates and binding precedents?
3.2 Design Tasks
Based on the requirements described above, we raised concrete visualization tasks to guide the LegalVis system’s
development, following the mantra “overview first, zoom and
filter, then details-on-demand” [19].
T1 - Identification of explicit and potential citations: The system should exhibit decisions that explicitly cite a specific
binding precedent (Q1.1) and identify/exhibit those that
could potentially mention it (non-explicit citation) (Q1.2,
Q1.3).
T2 - Overview of decisions and binding precedents: The system should provide an overview of all the decisions and

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 12:52:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3108

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 29, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

Fig. 1. LegalVis workflow. (a) We first retrieve explicit citation information and filter representative decisions/BPs from our database. (b) These data
are used in an elaborate and two-fold strategy to infer potential citations. Finally, (c) the user can interactively explore documents that cite or could
potentially cite binding precedents through the three visual components that compose our framework.

binding precedents, highlighting the chronological order
they appear (Q1.3).
T3 - Filtering and selecting decisions: The system should
allow filtering decisions by justice rapporteur, by decision
type, and by type of citation (explicit or potential) (Q1.1,
Q1.2, Q1.3). It should also allow selecting decisions based
on the date and binding precedent (Q2.1).
T4 - Grouping and ordering decisions: The system should
identify and group similar decisions that cite the same binding precedent on a given date (Q2.2) and order them in the
layout according to the similarity between binding precedent and parts of a decision (Q2.3).
T5 - Highlight in decisions’ relevant parts: The system
should quickly identify the most similar paragraphs/sentences to the binding precedent (Q3.1). It should also highlight those parts that (either explicitly or potentially) cite
that precedent (Q3.2).
T6 - Document browsing history: The system must provide
means to access decisions already analyzed quickly, regardless of the date and binding precedent (Q3.3).

3.3 Workflow
After mapping the requirements into design tasks, we define
the system’s workflow (see Fig. 1). In the first stage, data collection (a), we consult the digitized decisions stored in a database. They already contain the explicit citations that were
found using regular expressions. However, it is necessary to
query and label the decisions and binding precedents that
we will use in the following stages (details in Section 4).
In the second stage, identification of potential citations (b),
we use the collected data to train a machine learning model
that characterizes a citation to a particular binding precedent. After that, the procedure infers potential citations and
explains the reason behind the decision by employing an
interpretability method (details in Section 5).
Finally, in the third stage, visualization (c), users explore
and visualize documents that explicitly cite or that can
potentially be citing binding precedents. LegalVis comprises three linked view components: Global View, which
presents an overview of the data under a temporal perspective; Paragraph Similarities View, which allows for filtering
and grouping relevant documents; and Document Reader,
which shows a document’s content and points out which
parts of the document are likely to mention a binding precedent (details in Section 6).

4

process (justice rapporteur), and the document type (e.g.,
Complaint or Extraordinary Appeal). In this work, we are
interested in STF decisions that are somehow related to a
binding precedent, explicitly or potentially citing it.
In total, we have 58 binding precedents, idealized as a
mechanism to create a consolidated understanding among
the STF’s justices. We collected our dataset from a partnership with the Supremo em Numeros (“STF in Numbers”, in
free translation) project [43] — a project that seeks to assess
legal and computer knowledge to produce unprecedented
data on the Supreme Court. This dataset contains more than
2,500,000 documents since 1988 and metadata such as the
number of the BP being cited (if that is the case) and document type. Considering only decisions that explicitly cite at
least one of the 58 BPs, there are 38,364 documents, totaling
41,031 citations (some documents may mention more than
one BP). The number of citations per BP does not follow a
uniform distribution, as we can see in Fig. 2.
As requested by the domain experts, the name of the justice rapporteur is essential for the analysis. However, this
information was not in the initial dataset, so we extracted it
using regular expressions in the document’s content. As
part of the data cleaning process, we had some difficulties:
(i) documents with different titles but same content (we
refer to them as duplicated documents), and (ii) documents
in which it is not trivial to extract out the justice name. However, these problems did not impact our work’s development, and we give more details in Section 9.
In this work, we decided to deal with documents that
explicitly cite at least one of the ten most-cited BPs (i.e., 3, 4,
10, 11, 14, 17, 20, 26, 33, and 37). We made this decision to
have a representative sample of documents and citations. In
fact, after ignoring the “duplicated” documents and considering only documents that cite just one BP each, we gathered 29,743 documents and 31,070 citations related to these
10 BPs, which corresponds to 77.5% and 75.7%, respectively,
compared to all documents and citations from the initial
dataset. Besides these 29,743 documents, we also consider
other 30 thousand documents, without explicit citations,

DATASET

When an STF’s justice decides a case, this decision is consolidated in a document. Each document contains the decision’s text, publication date, the justice that conducted the

Fig. 2. Number of documents with a BP citation. Note that many BPs
have just a few citations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 12:52:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RESCK ET AL.: LEGALVIS: EXPLORING AND INFERRING PRECEDENT CITATIONS IN LEGAL DOCUMENTS

Fig. 3. Pipeline of identification of potential citations. (a) Labeled documents are pre-processed and used to fit a classifier that learns what
characterizes a citation. (b) The fitted classifier is used to infer potential
citations for documents without explicit citations, and an interpretability
technique explains the inference, presenting the most relevant
sentences.

that we will use to identify potential citations (details
in Section 5). Finally, our documents generally have less
than four thousand words (we have a word count histogram
in Appendix B, (available online)).

5

IDENTIFICATION OF POTENTIAL CITATIONS

In the context of citations to binding precedents, relevant
questions may arise. For instance, “are there documents that
potentially cite a BP?” (i.e., the document should have cited
the BP but it has not), or “are the document and the BP related
enough?” These questions can help understand how STF
works and if the BPs are being correctly applied.
In this section, we investigate the possibility of potential
citations and how to find them. We describe our modeling
of identification of potential citations as a classification task,
and we discuss how to use classifiers to infer the citations.
Our pipeline for identifying potential citations (Fig. 3) is
composed of two main steps: (a) the learning process, when
the models learn what makes a citation, and (b) the potential
citation inference, when we use the models to identify a
potential citation and an interpretability technique to
explain this decision. We give more details about these
stages in the following.

5.1 Learning Process
Suppose there is a function dX : U ! R that takes a document D from our corpus U and returns a score of citing
the binding precedent X. When a document has a
“good” score through dX , we can assign it to a potential
citation group. Motivated by this reasoning, the potential
citation identification process starts searching for such a
function dX .
There are many ways to model the problem above. Two
possible approaches are to consider the score dX as the distance between the document D and the BP X in some
latent space or compute the probability of D citing the BP
X. With these approaches, when the distance between D
and BP X is small, or D citing X’s probability is high, we
say that we found a potential citation. The distance
between D and BP X can be computed by embedding D
and BP X in a high dimensional vector space (e.g.,

3109

Doc2vec [44]) and then calculating the distance in this
space. In the second case, we could compute the probability of a document D citing BP X by modeling the problem
as a classification task. If we fit a classification model in
documents that cite the BP X, the model can learn what
makes a document cite the precedent. Therefore, we could
employ the trained classifier to verify whether a new document cites the BP X, using the model’s probability as a
confidence level for this assignment.
In this work, we rely on the classification approach to
identify potential citations to BPs. The distance-based
approach is similar to clustering with centers in the BPs, so
the approach is unsupervised by nature. On the other hand,
the classification is supervised and leverages the labels of
the other documents. It is also easier to identify a potential
citation confidence threshold in terms of probabilities than
distances (e.g., documents with model’s probability greater
than tc are assigned to a potential citation). Moreover, it is
more straightforward to apply interpretability techniques to
classification models’ decisions (e.g., using Lime [45] or
Anchors [46]) instead of trying to interpret citation inference
using vector representations.
Data Pre-Processing. Before training our models, we need
to process our data and create a balanced sample dataset,
further split into training, validation, and test datasets. We
generate the sample dataset by choosing a random sample
of documents that cite one of the ten most-cited BPs. As
described in Section 4, we do not consider “duplicated”
documents or documents citing more than one BP. Avoiding duplicated documents is necessary to prevent the classifier from overfitting the data. Having documents citing only
one BP ensures they only have one label, making the classification task more straightforward.
We chose only to consider the ten most-cited precedents.
The reasons for this decision are twofold. First, the number
of documents associated with less frequent BPs is not
enough to train the models, demanding extra effort to remedy this situation, such as using a data augmentation
scheme. Second, the reduced number of documents associated with the less frequent BPs can quickly be inspected
manually, so there is no need to undertake efforts to
develop sophisticated resources to analyze them. In total,
our sample dataset contains 6,730 documents balanced
among the ten classes.
Given that most documents explicitly contain the text
“Binding Precedent #X” (in free translation), we remove
these citations using regular expressions to avoid hints during the classification process. The documents also underwent a standard NLP text pre-processing, which included
converting the text to lowercase, tokenization, removing
punctuation and stop words, and lemmatization.
Text Embedding. As mentioned above, we use a classification model to assess the probability of a document citing a
BP. To assess different classifiers’ performance, we rely on
text embedding methods to generate a vector representation
of the documents. We test different embeddings to evaluate
their performance: TF-IDF [47], Doc2vec [44], Universal Sentence Encoder (USE) [10], and Longformer [48]. In TF-IDF’s
particular case, we have also applied a dimensionality
reduction procedure to map the documents to a 50-dimensional space using Truncated Singular Value Decomposition

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 12:52:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3110

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 29, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

(SVD) [49]. We call the final representation Truncated TFIDF. The reason to consider Longformer, instead of a more
popular language model, e.g., BERT [50], is that Longformer
overcomes BERT’s limitation of 512 tokens. Note that USE
and Longformer do not need a pre-processed text (as
described in the previous paragraph) because both have
their tokenization mechanism.
Classification. Support Vector Machines (SVM) are complex enough for real-world classification problems and simple enough to be analyzed mathematically [51]. Our study
considers SVM with linear and Radial Basis Function (RBF)
kernels. Moreover, given that Longformer [48] has a linear
classification neural network layer plugged into it, we also
fine-tuned it to assess its classification performance in our
context.
The described classifiers are used to search for potential
citations in unlabeled data, assigning probabilities to each
document to belong to each class. To get probabilities from
an SVM, we need to make calibration: using labeled data,
create a map from the classifier’s output (SVM scores) to a
probability estimate for each class, which sum up to 1. To
create this map, we use the calibration method from Platt
et al. [52] for SVM with linear kernel and the Wu et al.’s [53]
method for RBF kernel. Platt et al.’s method, precisely, does
not support the multiclass case, so we calibrate each class in
a “one-versus-rest” approach and normalize the results in
the end to sum up to 1. This map will receive the SVM
scores from a data instance and output a probability estimate for each class.

5.2 Potential Citation Inference
This section describes how we use the classifiers to identify
potential citations and understand the models’ decisions
(see Fig. 3b).
Citation Inference. The association between a text embedding technique and a classifier gives us what we call a model.
A model receives the raw text and returns the classifier’s
probabilities, which we interpret as the document’s probability to cite each precedent. We consider a potential citation
when the citation probability is greater or equal to a threshold tc 2 ½0; 1 (chosen by the user).
Interpretability. A concern when dealing with machine
learning models is their interpretability. For instance, if
Truncated TF-IDF combined with SVM points out that a
document potentially cites BP 10 because of high returned
probability, how can we understand the reasons behind this
decision? Generally speaking, how can we trust this model?
Understanding why a model is taking a particular decision
is of paramount importance [45], especially in sensitive scenarios like a legal document analysis.
Consider document X and its embedding vector x 2 Rd
(e.g., TF-IDF vector). This document’s probability of belonging to class C is given by fC ðxÞ, with fC : Rd ! ½0; 1 a model’s returned probability for class C. Our particular interest
is to know the importance of each sentence from document
X to the given probability, i.e., if each sentence has positive,
negative, or neutral importance, and the magnitude of this
importance.
After preliminary tests have discarded the employment
of the leave-one-out feature importance (LOO) [54] for

interpretability due to its high sensitivity, we chose the Local
Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations (Lime) [45] method
to tackle this issue. The intuition is that, by removing a specific sentence and obtaining the variation of probability
DfC , we can measure the importance of this sentence for the
prediction fC ðxÞ. More formally, we randomly remove
some sentences from document X, vectorize this new document to z, and add it to set Z. Doing this many times, we
have a collection Z of vectors around x in high dimensional
space. We approximate fC ðzÞ using a linear model gðzÞ,
minimizing the approximation error LðfC ; g; zÞ in z 2 Z, but
also constraining the complexity VðgÞ of g.
This task can be interpreted as a weighted linear regression with regularization. We end with a model gðzÞ that is
linear over the sentences (i.e., the presence or absence of a
sentence), where the linear model’s coefficients can be interpreted as the importance score of each sentence to the final
prediction fC ðxÞ.
By default, Lime works with words, and there is also the
possibility of interpreting entire paragraphs. A word division brings some advantages, such as detailing. Still, it does
not immediately assess each sentence’s importance to the
decision (e.g., sentences similar to the BP text). A paragraph
division is also interesting for visualization purposes (see,
for example, Section 6.3), but it merges various sentences
into one, hampering the precise identification of relevant
parts. Therefore, our choice of working with sentences comprises the “best of both worlds”. In our experiments, Lime
proved to be very robust and reliable when dealing with
sentences.

5.3 Modeling Results
The modeling described in Fig. 3 (i.e., fitting classifiers to data,
using the classifiers to infer citations, and interpreting these
inferences) needs to be validated. In this section, we evaluate
the modeling process quantitatively and qualitatively.
Quantitative Analysis. We fit the classifiers with the text
embedding to a training set corresponding to 80% of our
labeled, balanced sample dataset (randomly chosen, preserving balancing). Before applying SVM, each text embedding coordinate was standardized, improving SVM
classification performance [55]. Then, we performed a grid
search and cross-validation to optimize SVM parameters
(linear and RBF). We also fine-tuned the Longformer model
for four epochs, with a batch size of 12 and a linear decrease
of the learning rate. In general, all models performed well
in the validation set (10% of the sample dataset, preserving
balancing), especially TF-IDF-based models and Longformer, as depicted in Table 1. In particular, Truncated TFIDF with linear SVM has an excellent performance when
predicting the correct BP on this set, as shown in the confusion matrix comparing the true with the predicted BPs from
Fig. 4. Recall that the explicit mentions of the BPs were
removed from the documents in the pre-processing step.
Qualitative Analysis. The models’ quantitative results support the idea that searching for potential citations can be
solved as a classification task. Moreover, TF-IDF combined
with SVM and Longformer presented pretty good results.
However, Longformer tends to assign probability close to 1
to a particular class and the remaining probabilities close to

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 12:52:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RESCK ET AL.: LEGALVIS: EXPLORING AND INFERRING PRECEDENT CITATIONS IN LEGAL DOCUMENTS

TABLE 1
Evaluation of Models’ Performance on Validation Portion of the
Sample Dataset
Embedding
Trunc. TF-IDF
TF-IDF
Longformer
Doc2vec
USE

Classifier
Linear
RBF
Linear
RBF
Linear
RBF
Linear
RBF

Acc.
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.93
0.93
0.84
0.88
0.85
0.86

Precision
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.93
0.93
0.85
0.88
0.86
0.87

Recall
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.93
0.93
0.84
0.88
0.85
0.86

F1 score
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.93
0.93
0.84
0.88
0.85
0.86

Precision, recall, and F1 score are the average of each class’ metrics weighted by
number of class instances.

zero. This fact makes it hard to interpret the probabilities
returned by Longformer as a confidence level. In contrast,
Truncated TF-IDF with SVM better distributes probabilities
between 0 and 1. This fact added to other properties — ease
of implementation, low dimensionality, and validation performance — rendered Truncated TF-IDF with linear SVM
the better choice in our context.
Chosen Model on Test Data. The chosen model (Truncated
TF-IDF with linear SVM), which had good performance on
validation data (Table 1), also performed well on test data
(10% of a sample dataset, balanced), achieving 0.96 in all
metrics of Table 1.
Identification Analysis. To search for potential citations, we
run our model with a document collection containing 30,000
documents that do not cite any BP (Section 4). For sanity
check, we also run our model in documents that explicitly
cite the ten chosen BPs. Of course, when the model assigns
a potential citation that is the same as the explicit citation,
we continue calling it explicit citation. The goal is to rely on
the classification model to find potential citations as one of
the ten chosen BPs. The larger the user-defined threshold tc
(Section 5.2, Citation Inference), the smaller the number of
documents with potential citations, as presented in Table 2.

Fig. 4. Confusion matrix of Truncated TF-IDF with linear SVM on validation portion.

3111

TABLE 2
Number of Documents With Potential Citations of Each BP
Found by Truncated TF-IDF, for Three Different tc Values

3

4

10

11

14

BP
17

20

26

33

37

4
45
124

73
237
374

1
65
476

1
8
85

2
78
212

7
184
524

4
59
88

5
118
368

50
344
469

1
42
119

tc
0.99
0.95
0.90

We use Lime (Section 5.2) to understand why the model
assigned a potential citation to a document. The local model
fitted by Lime is a linear classifier. We can interpret this
model’s weights as the importance of each sentence to the
model’s decision, i.e., the potential citation assignment.
These weights were mapped into a color range in the document background to visually indicate which sentences are
more important. The validation of this assignment’s
interpretability, so as the potential citation assignment, is
established in the usage scenarios discussed in Section 7.

6

LEGALVIS

In this section we describe the visual components that compose LegalVis and also provide implementation details. As
shown in Fig. 5, the system is made up of three main components, namely Global View, Paragraph Similarities View,
and Document Reader, that address the proposed design
tasks as depicted in Table 3.

6.1 Global View
Global View (Fig. 5a) is the main and first opened panel. This
view is responsible for showing an overview of the dataset
under a temporal perspective (T2) and providing interactive
tools that guide the user in searching for documents of interest (T3). Some documents in the dataset do not have valid
date information, as will be discussed in Section 9. Since
Global View depends on this attribute, these documents
were potentially used to train the classification model (Section 5) but ignored in the visualization.
In this view, the x-axis represents the time a document
was published (monthly resolution), and the y-axis represents the BP. The red pins ( ) refer to the publication date
of the corresponding BPs. For each one, a vertical bar on a
particular date indicates the existence of documents published on that date that cite such BP (T1). The height of each
bar reflects the number of documents published on that
date, and its color is defined such that (i) blue bars (without
borders) indicate that every document in that month cites
the BP explicitly, (ii) orange bars (without borders) suggest
that every document potentially (rather than explicitly) cites
the BP, and (iii) blue bars with orange edges indicate the
presence of both explicit and potential citations.
For better understanding and exploration of regions of
interest, users can zoom in, zoom out and pan. Other interactions include filtering documents by (i) the type of citation
(explicit and/or potential); (ii) justice rapporteur; (iii) document type (e.g., complaints or appeals); and (iv) potential citation confidence (threshold tc ). Finally, a tooltip showing the
number of the BP, the date, and the number of documents

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 12:52:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3112

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 29, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

Fig. 5. LegalVis is composed of three interactive views designed to support the exploration of documents and binding precedents: Global View, Paragraph Similarities View, and Document Reader.

(total, with explicit citations, and with potential citations)
appears when a bar is hovered over. The publication date of
the BP is also shown alongside the red pin.
We considered other design choices for Global View, for
example, fixed-size squares with the number of documents
mapped by a color-scale (a strategy similar to the Temporal
Activity Map [56]) and varying-size circles instead of vertical
bars. Since color coding was already considered the more
suitable strategy to represent explicit/potential citations in
this view (and in Paragraph Similarities View, as we show in
the next section), and given the high level of overlaps and
cluttering obtained with varying-size circles, mapping the
number of documents through bars with varying heights
was preferred.

6.2 Paragraph Similarities View
Once the user has found a set of documents (i.e., a bar) of
interest in Global View, he/she can select such a set by clicking on the bar. The user is then redirected to the Paragraph
Similarities View (Fig. 5b), which presents in the y-axis all
documents from the selected bar, that is, documents that
cite a particular BP on a given date.
Each document is divided into paragraphs, indicated by
the horizontal stack of bars. The bar’s size means the size
of the paragraph, and the color intensity reflects the
TABLE 3
Visual Components of LegalVis and the Addressed Tasks

Global View
Parag. Similarities
Document Reader

T1

T2

Design Task
T3
T4

✓
✓
✓

✓

✓

✓

T5

T6

✓
✓

✓

similarity between the corresponding paragraph and the
BP text; the darker the color, the greater the similarity, and
the more common parts exist between the BP and the paragraph (T5). Similarly to Global View, the color of each
stacked bar stands for explicit (blue) or potential (orange)
citation (T1). The similarity is given by the angular distance [10] between two Truncated-TF-IDF vectors, but
other embeddings and similarities (e.g., the raw cosine
similarity) could be adopted.
To guide users further exploring the set of documents, we
group them into clusters (T4 – details below). Inside each cluster, the documents are positioned in descending order of similarity between the document and the BP, which is defined as
the maximum similarity between its paragraphs and the BP
(T4). Showing documents in descending order of similarity is
helpful because the user can promptly identify the top-k most
similar, and therefore most interesting, documents. Furthermore, to quickly assess the document distribution w.r.t. the
similarity values, we also show an interactive bar chart above
each color bar.
Document Clustering. Since a binding precedent may
cover decisions related to different subjects, the Brazilian
Supreme Court website provides, for each BP, some clusters
of decisions created according to their subjects. There are
only a few clusters for each BP, each containing a few
labeled documents (for instance, there are 8 clusters for BP
4, each containing two documents on average). We
employed NLP text pre-processing and applied topic
modeling strategies to cluster documents according to their
relevant words to take advantage of this limited but useful
ground truth. We have tested different and well-established
topic extraction methods, including LDA [57], NMF [58],
SNMF [59], and PSMF [60]. The NMF (Frobenius norm)
method presented the best results, so we adopted it as the
default method.

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 12:52:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RESCK ET AL.: LEGALVIS: EXPLORING AND INFERRING PRECEDENT CITATIONS IN LEGAL DOCUMENTS

3113

6.4 Implementation Details
Our system adopts a client-server architecture. From the client perspective (front-end), all three visual components
were implemented using the D3 library [61]. The serverside (back-end) was implemented in Python and employs
some well-established libraries and tools, such as Flask [62],
Scikit-learn [63], NLTK [64], ElasticSearch [65], and others.
For storing and retrieving documents’ and binding precedents’ information, LegalVis relies on a MySQL database.
Fig. 6. Comparison between a selected paragraph and the binding precedent. By hovering over the paragraphs of a selected document in Document Reader, users can compare their contents with the binding
precedent being cited. Optionally, common parts are highlighted to help
in the analysis (yellow).

In the Paragraph Similarities View, users are free to
choose the desired number of clusters/topics. A word cloud
with the top-10 most relevant keywords is shown alongside
each cluster to optimize the task of finding clusters of interand
allow one to navigate between the
est. Buttons
detected clusters.

6.3 Document Reader
After finding a decision that seems interesting, the user
selects one of its paragraphs by clicking on it. At this
moment, he/she is redirected to Document Reader (Fig. 5c), a
view that enables the analysis of both the document’s content and the BP text. In this view, the colored bars from the
Paragraph Similarities View are also visible alongside the
paragraphs (Figs. 5c and 6).
When a paragraph is hovered over, its content and the BP
text are shown as illustrated in Fig. 6, with the common
parts highlighted or not depending on the user’s needs (T5
— flag “Show text similarity”). In the example shown in the
figure, one may notice that the text of the paragraph associated with the darkest blue bar is contained in the BP text
(see yellow highlights). To analyze any other paragraph of
the current document, one may hover over its text without
revisiting Paragraph Similarities View.
Document Reader also incorporates Lime when the
opened document refers to a potential citation (T1, T5). In
this case, instead of just showing the document’s raw text
(as in Fig. 6), the parts of the document’s content are
highlighted according to their influence (negative, neutral,
or positive) in the potential citation identification process
(see Fig. 5c).
Since one may analyze many documents published on
different dates and citing different BPs, Document Reader
also keeps track of recently opened documents (T6), allowing the user to quickly revisit them through the document
browsing history (Fig. 6).
In practice, it is not uncommon to find complex cases in
which a single justice writes his or her decision in a document with more than 100 pages. Document Reader minimizes experts’ reading time by tracking recently opened
documents of interest and pointing out exactly which paragraphs of the document are likely to mention the binding
precedent, even if not explicitly. These characteristics
increase the time efficiency of those who search for specific
citations in long documents.

7

USAGE SCENARIOS

In this section, we discuss two usage scenarios that demonstrate the capabilities of LegalVis in exploring legal documents related to binding precedents. The first usage
scenario is related to tasks T1, T2, T5 and highlights the system’s effectiveness in identifying potential citations under
three different situations. The second usage scenario
addresses T2, T3, T4, and T6 by showing an exploratory
analysis involving related decisions reported by two particular justice rapporteurs. Unless explicitly stated otherwise,
all analyses adopt tc ¼ 0:95. To better understand, we also
translated those parts of documents and binding precedents
crucial for the analyses to English. The original text contents
(in Portuguese) are available in Appendix A, in the online
supplemental material.

7.1 Exploring Potential Citations
As observed in the explicit citations, potential citations are
expected to exist in documents published after the publication of the binding precedent they refer to. There are,
though, documents with potential citations to a particular
BP whose publishing date is before the creation date of that
BP. Recall that a binding precedent represents a consolidated understanding among the Supreme Court’s justices.
Thus a series of decisions may have existed related to this
underlying judicial issue that led to the precedent’s creation. In this usage scenario, we explore three particular
potential citations (Fig. 7), two of them identified in documents prior to the binding precedent publication
(Fig. 7, left and middle).
The first potential citation involves a document published in Feb. 2013 containing an instrument appeal (“agravo
de instrumento”, in Portuguese). According to the system,
this document potentially cites BP 37, even though this BP
was published in Oct. 2014 (Fig. 7a). When analyzing how
similar the paragraphs of this document are to BP 37 in the
Paragraph Similarities View, we see that one of them is very
close to it (the darkest orange bar in Fig. 7b). By looking at
the content of this presumable relevant paragraph in the
Document Reader (Fig. 7c), one may notice that Lime considered a long part of it as of great importance in the citation
identification process (see the darkest green background on
the text). Recall that Document Reader also allows users to
compare the text of the corresponding binding precedent
with any selected paragraph, with the possibility of
highlighting their common parts. By using this feature
(Fig. 7d), we can easily perceive that this paragraph contains
the entire BP text, with a single modification (“on the” versus
“on”). At this point, a relevant question emerges: How can a
document have the text of a BP before its creation? In fact, this

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 12:52:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3114

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 29, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

Fig. 7. Three potential citations to different binding precedents. (left) a document with the entire BP 37’s text but published before creating this binding
precedent. (middle) a document published before the creation of BP 4 that potentially cites its underlying reasoning. (right) a document potentially citing BP 10 while adopting a different terminology to refer to this binding precedent (unlabeled document).

document does not quote BP 37; instead, it quotes Precedent
339 (Sumula 339), a precedent that was eventually converted
into BP 37 [66] (see explicit mention to Precedent 339 just
before the highlighted parts in Fig. 7d).
A potential citation with the explicit BP text is an exception, especially for documents published before the creation
of the BP. The expected behavior is that documents and BPs
involved in potential citations have the same implicit reasoning. Our second analysis (Fig. 7 (middle)) illustrates this
case by considering an instrument appeal, published in
Nov. 2004 (Fig. 7e), that potentially cites BP 4 (created in
April 2008). After selecting one of its paragraphs in the Paragraph Similarities View (Fig. 7f), we can compare its text
with the BP text in the Document Reader. When analyzing
the BP text and also two parts that were considered relevant
by Lime in two adjacent paragraphs (the selected one and a
neighbor), we see that both the document and the BP refer
to the prohibition of using the minimum wage as an indexing factor (Fig. 7g), which supports the claim of a valid
potential citation; they however describe this subject in different ways.
The two cases described so far demonstrate the usefulness of LegalVis for identifying and analyzing documents published before creating the binding precedent
they are somehow related to. Identifying and exploring
these documents help users to understand why the
Supreme Court creates binding precedents, one of the
key needs pointed out by judicial experts that LegalVis
successfully addresses through tasks T1 (identification of
potential citations), T2 (overview of documents under a
temporal perspective), and T5 (highlight in relevant parts
of the documents).
In practice, a justice may refer to a binding precedent X as
“binding entry #X of the precedent” (“verbete vinculante no X
da sumula”, in free translation). This latter terminology was
not considered when labeling the documents, so (i)

documents adopting it were marked as not having explicit
citations (i.e., unlabeled documents), and (ii) it can be used
as ground-truth to validate the identification process.
To study this case, we rely on a complaint (“reclamaç~
ao”)
that potentially cites BP 10 when adopting tc ¼ 0:91
(Fig. 7 (right)). This document was selected among all documents that (explicitly or potentially) cite BP 10 in Sep. 2013
(Figs. 7h and 7i). When comparing the text of the BP with one
of the paragraphs marked as of great importance by Lime
(Fig. 7j), we can notice that both refer to some violation of the
so-called plenary reserve clause. Still, while the BP defines
the rule, the document brings a real-world and related situation. Although this common subject suggests a coherent and
valid potential citation, we can validate it by observing an
explicit mention to “Binding Entry #10 of the Precedent of
the Supreme Court” in another document’s paragraph
(Fig. 7j). This example supports once more the usefulness of
LegalVis in identifying and exploring potential citations and
demonstrates the potential of the system to optimize and validate document labeling.

7.2 Related Decisions
Users may explore LegalVis to search for patterns involving
decisions and/or BPs. As shown in Fig. 8, this usage scenario presents an exploratory analysis focusing on related
decisions reported by two Supreme Court’s justices, Teori
Zavascki and Edson Fachin.
BP 14 covers a criminal law theme. It grants lawyers the
right to access every documented evidence already collected during an investigation that could help them prove
their client’s innocence. It was applied, for example, at the
Lava Jato case, a criminal investigation started in 2014 in Brazil on alleged irregularities involving several individuals
and companies, among them Petrobras, the largest stateowned company in Brazil [67].

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 12:52:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RESCK ET AL.: LEGALVIS: EXPLORING AND INFERRING PRECEDENT CITATIONS IN LEGAL DOCUMENTS

Fig. 8. Exploratory analysis showing a decision reported by Edson
Fachin that is related to other reported by Teori Zavascki on the same
subject: Lava Jato operation.

Among the 64 documents of type “petition” (“petiç~
ao”, in
Portuguese) that cite or are likely to cite BP 14, 33 are associated with Teori Zavascki and 21 to Edson Fachin.
Likewise, among the 67 documents of type “investigation”
(“inquerito”) related to this BP, Zavascki is the rapporteur of
26, and Fachin has 18, followed by other justices. Except for
a single document, Fachin only started dealing with documents of these types after Zavascki stopped, as illustrated
by Fig. 8a for documents “investigation”. A brief background is required to understand this behavior: Teori
Zavascki was the Supreme Court’s justice rapporteur for
the Lava Jato operation cases. Several of Zavascki’s decisions, therefore, were related to Lava Jato. He passed away
in Jan. 2017 due to an airplane crash, and Fachin was
appointed as a new rapporteur for the Lava Jato’s cases
from that moment on [68].
In this usage scenario, rather than validating potential
citation identification, we want to find out if there is a relation between decisions from Zavascki and Fachin connected
to Lava Jato. We begin our exploratory analysis by selecting
in Global View all documents associated with Edson Fachin
for BP 14 in Sep. 2017. The five retrieved documents are

3115

shown in Paragraph Similarities View as a single cluster.
After asking for two clusters using topic modeling, the
documents are clustered as shown in Fig. 8b, i.e., a cluster
“Topic 1” containing two complaints (documents of type
“Rcl”) that explicitly cite BP 14 and a cluster “Topic 2”, containing three investigations (documents of type “Inq”) that
potentially cite BP 14. We also see terms related to investigation (e.g., “investigar” and “apurar”) and “petrobras” in the
word-cloud relative to Topic 2 (Fig. 8c), which is interesting
for our search. It is worth noting that the quality of this clustering supports the suitability of topic modeling for separating the documents. As expected, documents of different
types tend to be characterized by different words, and, consequently, separated into different clusters.
By exploring Topic 2’s last document (“Inq 4413”) with
Document Reader, we can identify three parts in the text
that are relevant for our analysis (Fig. 8d). By observing
these parts, we can finally establish the relationship we
were looking for: Fachin explicitly agrees with Zavascki’s
decision at “Investigation 4,231” (Fig. 8d-2). This decision,
which is related to Lava Jato and Petrobras (Fig. 8d-3), is
unfortunately under legal secrecy and is not available for
analysis. In his decision, Fachin also mentions two other
investigations (ids 4,325 and 4,326—see Fig. 8d-1), where
one may find other agreements or controversies. By identifying this kind of relation between decisions or justices,
experts can understand and explore the adopted arguments
in new and related processes or anticipate possible outcomes of ongoing ones. The system also facilitates comparisons of decisions. If we open multiple documents in the
system (e.g., those related to these investigations), we can
promptly switch between them by using the document
browsing history.
Recall that LegalVis has identified a potential citation
between “Inq 4413” and BP 14 with confidence tc ¼ 0:95.
Even though we could not establish reasons that justify this
identification, the presented usage scenario showed the system’s effectiveness in assisting users in finding patterns and
behaviors related to particular justices and documents’
types. Since LegalVis properly tackles tasks T2 and T3, finding the temporal relationship between cases reported by
Zavascki and Fachin was easy in the explored scenario.
Reaching the analyzed document of interest was easy,
mainly because of the topic modeling clustering (T4).
Finally, comparisons among different decisions are possible
and uncomplicated through the document browsing
history (T6).

8

EVALUATION FROM EXPERTS

This section describes an evaluation with experts performed
to collect detailed feedback about the presented usage scenarios, the usefulness and usability of the tool, and ideas for
further improvement.

8.1 Participants
We recruited six domain experts not involved in the tool’s
development to evaluate our proposal. They work as attorneys (2), researchers (2), legal assistants (1), and trainees (1)
and have from 1.5 to 22 years of experience in analyzing

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 12:52:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3116

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 29, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

legal documents and/or binding precedents. The participation was voluntary and without payment.

8.2 Evaluation Process
The expert evaluation involved three steps. First, the participants had to watch a video presenting the pipeline to identify potential citations, the visual components of LegalVis,
and the two usage scenarios described in Section 7. After
that, we invited them to explore the tool through two welldefined tasks:
T1. We asked the participants to select the documents
associated with justice Ricardo Lewandowski and: (i) identify the BP least cited by him; (ii) identify the time interval in
which he did not cite any BP (if any); (iii) based on the provided word cloud, give their opinion on what they think the
16 decisions associated to him and explicitly citing BP 20 on
May 2014 refer to; (iv) find a decision, reported by him, that
not only explicitly cites a BP (any BP) but also contains the
BP’s text. While we consider (i) and (ii) relatively straightforward as they can be answered through Global View with
few interactions (filtering options), our goal with (iii) was to
guide the participants to Paragraph Similarities View and
evaluate how helpful and trustful the word cloud containing
relevant keywords is. We also aimed to assess the system for
exploring decisions with explicit citations (iv).
T2. We asked the participants to find any decision with a
potential citation (tc ¼ 0:95) and inform which part of the
decision’s text they consider relevant w.r.t. the corresponding BP. Besides evaluating the system for explorations
involving potential citations, we aimed to assess the quality
of the results found by LegalVis on this matter.
Finally, the experts answered a set of quantitative (QT)
and qualitative (QL) questions. Regarding the quantitative
ones, participants had to answer, through a 5-point Likert
scale, whether they agree with the following statements:
“Usage scenario 1 is relevant.” (QT1); “Usage scenario 2 is relevant.” (QT2); “It is easy to find decisions with explicit or potential citations throughout time.” (QT3); “It is easy to filter
interesting decisions for analysis.” (QT4); “It is easy to identify
parts of decisions related to the BP of interest.” (QT5); “LegalVis
is useful.” (QT6); “It is easy to learn how to use LegalVis.”
(QT7); “LegalVis is efficient and would optimize my time.”
(QT8); “LegalVis is easy to use.” (QT9); “LegalVis has an intuitive interface.” (QT10).
Besides asking for comments on QT3-QT6, and also a
general comment on QT7-QT10, the qualitative questions
include: “What is your impression about the proposed pipeline
for the identification of potential citations?” (QL1); “What do
you highlight as relevant or interesting in usage scenarios 1
(QL2) and 2 (QL3)?”; “Without LegalVis, what are the challenges
in performing analysis similar to the ones you have made?”
(QL4); “What other tools that allow this type of analysis do you
know?” (QL5); “What are the advantages (QL6) and disadvantages (QL7) of LegalVis compared to other tools you are used
to?”; “In your opinion, which are the most helpful visual
components?” (QL8); “Besides the existing visual components,
which other components do you think could be incorporated in
LegalVis?” (QL9); “Would you like to leave a final comment?”
(QL10). We only asked QL6 and Q7 to those who know
other tools that allow similar analyses (QL5).

Fig. 9. Answers for questions QT1-QT10 according to six domain
experts not involved in the tool’s development. The bar length indicates
the percentage of respondents who have chosen that specific Likert
level.

8.3 Results
Five of the six participants responded to T1(i) correctly, and
all six provided similar/correct answers for T1(ii-iv). We
invalidated one answer for T2 because the participant used
a document with explicit citation (instead of a potential one)
to answer it; four of the other participants provided answers
in line with Lime. We present in the following the experts’
opinions about (i) the pipeline of identification of potential
citations, (ii) relevance of the usage scenarios described
in Section 7, (iii) system’s usefulness, (iv) usability, and (v)
scope for further improvements.
Potential Citation Identification (QL1, QL10). The experts
considered the pipeline interesting, robust, and promising.
One of the participants commented: “Although I don’t know
how the machine learning works, the proposal is exciting and,
without doubt, of great value not only to lawyers but also to all
careers that depend on the analysis of judicial decisions.” For
another expert, “The pipeline seems excellent. The use and
improvement of machine learning algorithms lead to great
results”. According to a third participant, “It enhances the
search for binding precedents and similar decisions, which helps
attorneys to support their petitions”.
Usage Scenarios (QT1, QT2, QL2, QL3). The first usage scenario was considered relevant by five of the six participants
(Fig. 9 (QT1)). According to their comments, they were particularly delighted because it “clearly demonstrates the applicability of the tool” and its results show that LegalVis “enables
and facilitates the identification of previous court positions that
led to the creation of BPs” in a “practical and intelligent way”.
Although the overall rating for the second usage scenario
is also positive (Fig. 9 (QT2)), one participant considered it
not relevant. He/she stated: “This analysis involves going
through several steps that seem less necessary. If the objective is to
compare decisions, a simpler way would be to compare the decisions they cite and their content directly”. It is worth noting
that this usage scenario describes the comparison between
decisions and demonstrates how users can find relevant
decisions and justices to be compared. For another participant, this usage scenario is relevant because it shows that
the system “helps to find similar decisions, which bring unity to
the judiciary”. A third expert commented: “I foresee great
applicability in the field of legal arguments. Great.”
System’s Usefulness (QT6, QT8, QL4-QL6, QL10). All participants consider LegalVis a useful tool, and all but one
think it is efficient and time-saving (Fig. 9 (QT6, QT8)). One
of them commented: “While learning the features, I already

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 12:52:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RESCK ET AL.: LEGALVIS: EXPLORING AND INFERRING PRECEDENT CITATIONS IN LEGAL DOCUMENTS

anticipated using the tool better illustrate my classes, opinions,
and scientific articles”. According to another participant: “It
will greatly help all law professionals, bringing more quality to
the services provided and reducing research time”. A third expert
commented: “I hope I can use the tool for professional purposes
as soon as possible.”
According to the experts, LegalVis is useful because it
addresses some critical issues related to large-scale data
analysis (3 participants mentioned this issue), filtering
options (2), and searches based only on keywords (3). Only
two participants responded ‘yes’ when asked whether they
know similar tools. The tools they mentioned are the STF’s
website and a platform named JusBrasil [34]. According to
one participant, “the search offered by these websites is based
only on keywords and some filters. Thus, LegalVis proves to be
much more complete and useful for the better development of
activities related to legal arguments. In my opinion, the LegalVis
proposal is broader and more useful.” Another participant commented: “LegalVis seems to have a proposal that simplifies largescale data analysis. Most jurists I know rely on search tools based
on not much more than keywords. In that sense, LegalVis would
be an important tool”. A third expert highlighted one problem
with keyword-based search engines: “Without LegalVis, we
would have to search for keywords on the STF’s website. The problem is that it is not always possible to think of good keywords to
use. Sometimes even their search engine is poor.”
Besides the advantages mentioned above, LegalVis was
also considered useful because “potential citations seem to be
an excellent source of argument to use in the Courts.” This participant’s comment continues: “I consider the tool very useful,
not only in terms of litigation but also in the development of academic activities (scientific articles, research, classes, etc.).”
System’s Usability (QT3-QT5, QT7, QT9, QT10, QL8). Five
of the six participants consider it easy to find decisions with
citations throughout time (Fig. 9 (QT3)), especially those
with explicit citations. They also agree that one can quickly
identify parts of decisions related to the BP of interest
(Fig. 9 (QT5)). Filtering interesting decisions for analysis, on
the other hand, was considered a more difficult task
(Fig. 9 (QT4)). About that, one participant commented: “The
learning curve of the system is a little slower at first due to the
complexity and a large number of utilities that can be extracted.
However, I emphasize that it is possible to filter very interesting
documents for analysis”. Despite this comment about the
learning curve, most experts agree that it is easy to learn
how to use LegalVis (Fig. 9 (QT7)).
According to most participants, LegalVis is easy to use
and has an intuitive interface (Fig. 9 (QT9, QT10)). Regarding the most helpful visual components, the experts
reported different opinions: “the similarity color scale”,
“highlight in relevant excerpts”, “timeline visualization”,
“similarity bar alongside the decision’s paragraph”, “all of them
are useful”.
Scope for Improvements (QT4, QT10, QL7, QL9, QL10).
Although LegalVis shows strong capabilities to enhance the
analysis of legal documents and binding precedents, it can
still be improved as suggested by the domain experts.
Regarding filtering interesting decisions and new features,
received suggestions include “filtering by justice and document
type are interesting, but I think more important is a keyword filter,
similar to the one offered by the STF’s website, to make it easier to

3117

search for a specific subject.” and “it would be nice if LegalVis
could incorporate subject filtering”. It is worth mentioning that,
since we have both the decisions’ texts and the capability to
detect relevant keywords through topic modeling, LegalVis
could incorporate these features with little effort.
Some experts felt that LegalVis could become more userfriendly and offer more filtering possibilities. One of them
commented: “The system is really cool! I think, however, that it
is still possible to improve the visual aspect, for example, by
removing from the visualization those BPs that are not subject of
the person’s research”. Another expert also suggested filtering
decisions based on time intervals defined by the user. LegalVis can naturally incorporate these filtering options.
About the quality of the potential citation identification,
one participant reported that “there seem to be a few cases
where the potential citation is not very related to the BP”. We
will discuss ideas for improving our model in the next
section.

9

DISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS

The presented usage scenarios and experts’ evaluations
show that LegalVis is a helpful tool to assist judicial experts
in analyzing legal documents. LegalVis can also be adapted
to assist experts from the legal field in deciding whether or
not a BP should be associated with a process under analysis,
reducing the processing times. A similar framework could
also be applied to other domains like medicine and public
purchases. Medical prescriptions and government purchases can be seen as legal documents while the regulatory
rules as BPs, for example. Another potential application is
in scientific research, where papers to be cited can be seen
as precedents for new ones.
TF-IDF Performance. An important question from our
results is why TF-IDF presents better performance than the
new generation of text representations tools (Doc2vec, USE,
and Longformer). One hypothesis is that the presence of
specific words dictates the behavior of the classifier (SVM in
our case). We performed several experiments considering
both a decision tree classifier over bag-of-words and a logistic regression using TF-IDF with L1 regularization in a oneversus-rest multiclass classification approach to analyze this
aspect further. Both experiments showed that the presence
of specific words led to high accuracy in the classification
(over 85% on validation set). However, each classification
method highlights a different set of relevant words, making
it hard to establish a consensus on which words are essential for classifying each BP. This fact reinforces the critical
role of Lime, as it allows for breaking the document into
sentences rather than words, facilitating the interpretation.
Moreover, Lime explanations are local (per sample),
enabling individual understanding of the model’s decision.
The issue related to the inferior performance of Doc2vec,
USE, and Longformer may also be associated with the lack
of pre-trained models with Brazilian Portuguese, in particular with Brazilian Portuguese legal language, which has several particularities in the writing style and terms used
throughout the documents. This key factor might be negatively impacting the models’ performance. Training models
to suit the characteristics of legal data is a task we are very
interested in, and the accomplishment of this task is in our

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 12:52:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3118

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 29, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

near future plans. It is essential to mention that, in certain
cases, TF-IDF can, indeed, outperform Doc2vec, as already
reported by some previous work [69], [70], [71].
Problems With Data. The dataset we use came from a partnership with another project (recall Section 4). Unfortunately,
it presents some limitations that required some adaptations in
our system: (i) presence of some “duplicated” documents, i.e.,
documents with different titles but same raw texts that had to
be ignored in the classification to avoid overfitting the data;
(ii) presence of some documents without valid date attribute
(marked as Jan. 1970), which were ignored in the visualization; (iii) presence of some documents for which it was impossible to automatically extract justice information (marked as
“unknown justice”).
Potential Citation Identification Model. Although efficient,
our model is simple in the sense that it only considers the documents’ raw texts. As future work, we intend to incorporate
metadata (e.g., justice rapporteur and date) directly into the
process. These metadata already exist as parts of the texts, but
we hypothesize that giving more weight to them would
improve the identification. We also plan to experiment with
other models (e.g., Big Bird [72]) and analyze their performance. A promising experiment would be to test with Transformer-based models pretrained using Portuguese texts (e.g.,
BERTimbau [73]), differently of Longformer, which we
hypothesize is a downside in our case. Not least, the system’s
current version does not allow users to influence the model’s
decisions. We now intend to aggregate user relevance feedback to improve the performance through additional training.
Such feedback would be especially relevant when dealing
with more (and imbalanced) BPs or citations to multiple BPs.
Number of Documents and Binding Precedents. There are 58
binding precedents up to this moment, and we chose to
explore only the ten most cited of them. Before increasing
this number, one should be aware that there are binding
precedents with just a few citations, consequently impairing
the classification task. To address these issues, we intend to
explore data augmentation methods (e.g., EDA [74]) and
other unbalanced classification methods [75]. We also plan
to exhibit each class performance and each document’s
potential citation probability. This way, users are better
informed and can influence the system’s decisions through
the relevance feedback mentioned.
Topic Modeling. As shown in the second usage scenario, our
clustering strategy based on topic modeling is helpful to guide
users to documents of interest. However, the lack of ground
truth with a representative sample of decisions impaired a formal evaluation of its quality. Although validated by domain
experts for particular cases, we intend to augment our ground
truth and perform a more robust analysis.

10

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we presented LegalVis, a web-based visual
analytic system designed to assist lawyers and other judicial
experts in analyzing legal documents that cite or could
potentially cite binding precedents. LegalVis first identifies
potential citations by implementing a simple yet powerful
machine learning model based on classification. Then, an
interpretability mechanism also incorporated into the system
provides reliable explanations for the model’s decisions.

Finally, all this information becomes accessible through the
three interactive and linked views that compose the system.
Qualitative and quantitative analyses validated the performance of the proposed model and two usage scenarios demonstrated the usefulness and effectiveness of the LegalVis
system. Both scenarios were validated by six domain experts
not involved in the system’s development, who also reported
positive feedback.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the CNPq, FAPESP, FAPERJ, or
FGV. Lucas E. Resck and Jean R. Ponciano contributed equally
to this work. We would also like to thank Carlos Ivan Simonsen
who proposed the research question that this paper addresses.

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]

Brazilian National Council of Justice, “N
umero total de casos pendentes na justiça brasileira [Total number of pending cases in the
Brazilian legal system (free translation)].” Accessed: Mar. 30,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.cnj.jus.br/wp-content/
uploads/2013/01/fc587d0cef86f585d6872a4f0ff43107.zip
Brazilian Supreme Court, “S
umulas Vinculantes [Binding Precedents].” Accessed: Mar. 30, 2021. [Online]. Available: http://
www.stf.jus.br/portal/cms/verTexto.asp?servico¼jurisprudenciaSumulaVinculante
Brazilian Supreme Court, “N
umero de decis~
oes do STF entre 2011
e 2020 [Number of rulings on STF between 2011 and 2020 (free
translation)].” Accessed: Mar. 30, 2021. [Online]. Available:
http://www.stf.jus.br/portal/cms/verTexto.asp?servico¼estatistica&pagina¼decisoesgeral
M. Alharbi and R. S. Laramee, “SoS TextVis: A survey of surveys
on text visualization,” in Proc. Conf. Comput. Graph. Vis. Comput.,
2018, pp. 143–152.
K. Kucher and A. Kerren, “Text visualization techniques: Taxonomy, visual survey, and community insights,” in Proc. Pacific Vis.
Symp., 2015, pp. 117–121.
N. Cao and W. Cui, “Overview of text visualization
techniques,” in Introduction to Text Visualization. Atlantis Briefs
in Artificial Intelligence, vol. 1. Dordrecht, The Netherlands:
Atlantis Press, 2016.
J. Alsakran, Y. Chen, Y. Zhao, J. Yang, and D. Luo, “STREAMIT:
Dynamic visualization and interactive exploration of text
streams,” in Proc. IEEE Pacific Vis. Symp., 2011, pp. 131–138.
L. Van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,”
J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 2579–2605, 2008.
T. Yousef and S. J€anicke, “A survey of text alignment visualization,” IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graphics, vol. 27, no. 2,
pp. 1149–1159, Feb. 2021.
D. Cer et al., “Universal sentence encoder,” 2018, arXiv:1803.11175.
A. J. Soto et al., “Similarity-based support for text reuse in technical writing,” in Proc. ACM Symp. Document Eng., 2015, pp. 97–106.
M. Potthast et al., “Overview of the 5th international competition
on plagiarism detection,” in Proc. CLEF Conf. Multilingual Multimodal Inf. Access Eval., 2013, pp. 301–331.
P. Riehmann, M. Potthast, B. Stein, and B. Froehlich, “Visual
assessment of alleged plagiarism cases,” Comput. Graph. Forum,
vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 61–70, 2015.
S. J€anicke, A. Geßner, M. B€
uchler, and G. Scheuermann,
“Visualizations for text re-use,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Vis. Theory
Appl., 2014, pp. 59–70.
A. Abdul-Rahman et al., “Constructive visual analytics for text
similarity detection,” Comput. Graph. Forum, vol. 36, no. 1,
pp. 237–248, 2017.
S. J€anicke, G. Franzini, M. F. Cheema, and G. Scheuermann,
“Visual text analysis in digital humanities,” Comput. Graph. Forum,
vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 226–250, 2017.
M. F. Cheema, S. J€anicke, and G. Scheuermann, “AnnotateVis:
Combining traditional close reading with visual text analysis,”
in Proc. IEEE VIS Workshop Vis. Digit. Humanities, 2016.

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 12:52:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RESCK ET AL.: LEGALVIS: EXPLORING AND INFERRING PRECEDENT CITATIONS IN LEGAL DOCUMENTS

[18] N. Diakopoulos, D. Elgesem, A. Salway, A. Zhang, and K. Hofland, “Compare clouds: Visualizing text corpora to compare
media frames,” in Proc. IUI Workshop Vis. Text Analytics, 2015,
pp. 193–202.
[19] B. Shneiderman, “The eyes have it: A task by data type taxonomy
for information visualizations,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Vis. Lang.,
1996, pp. 336–343.
[20] D. Kiesel, P. Riehmann, H. Wachsmuth, B. Stein, and B. Froehlich,
“Visual analysis of argumentation in essays,” IEEE Trans. Vis.
Comput. Graphics, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 1139–1148, Feb. 2021.
[21] P. Zhang and L. Koppaka, “Semantics-based legal citation
network,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Law, 2007, pp. 123–130.
[22] R. Barros, A. Peres, F. Lorenzi, L. Krug Wives, and E. Hubert da
Silva Jaccottet , “Case law analysis with machine learning in Brazilian court,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Ind. Eng. Appl. Appl. Intell. Syst.,
2018, pp. 857–868.
[23] C. J. Mahoney, J. Zhang, N. Huber-Fliflet, P. Gronvall, and
H. Zhao, “A framework for explainable text classification in
legal document review,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Big Data, 2019, pp.
1858–1867.
[24] F. A. Correia, J. L. Nunes, G. F. C. F. de Almeida, A. A. A.
Almeida, and H. Lopes, “An exploratory analysis of precedent relevance in the Brazilian Supreme Court rulings,” in Proc. ACM
Symp. Document Eng., 2019, Art. no. 20.
[25] A. Mandal, R. Chaki, S. Saha, K. Ghosh, A. Pal, and S. Ghosh,
“Measuring similarity among legal court case documents,”
in Proc. 10th Annu. ACM India Compute Conf., 2017, pp. 1–9.
[26] N. Lettieri, A. Altamura, and D. Malandrino, “The legal macroscope: Experimenting with visual legal analytics,” Inf. Vis., vol.
16, no. 4, pp. 332–345, 2017.
[27] N. Lettieri, A. Altamura, A. Faggiano, and D. Malandrino,
“A computational approach for the experimental study of EU case
law: Analysis and implementation,” Soc. Netw. Anal. Mining,
vol. 6, no. 1, 2016, Art. no. 56.
[28] D. Kuppevelt and G. Dijck, “Answering legal research questions
about Dutch case law with network analysis and visualization,”
in Proc. 13th Annu. Conf. Legal Knowl. Inf. Syst., 2017, pp. 95–100.
[29] N. R. Carvalho and L. S. Barbosa, “Transforming legal documents
for visualization and analysis,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Theory Pract.
Electron. Governance, 2018, pp. 23–26.
[30] D. M. Chada, F. A. Silva, and P. Borges, “Visualizing Brazilian Justice: The Supreme Court 2.0 project,” in Proc. 15th Int. Conf. Artif.
Intell. Law, 2015, pp. 176–180.
[31] E. Gomez-Nieto, W. Casaca, I. Hartmann, and L. G. Nonato,
“Understanding large legal datasets through visual analytics,”
in Proc. 6th Workshop Vis. Analytics Inf. Vis. Sci. Vis. SIBGRAPI, 2015.
[32] Buscador Dizer o Direito, “Buscador Dizer o Direito: Encontre
jurisprud^encia comentada do STF e do STJ e muito mais [Search
engine Saying the Law: Find commented jurisprudence of the STF
and STJ and much more (free translation)].” Accessed: Sep. 06,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.buscadordizerodireito.
com.br/
[33] OABJuris, “OABJuris | Jurisprud^encia de uma forma mais agil e
eficaz [OABJuris | Jurisprudence in a more agile and effective
way (free translation)].” Accessed: Sep. 06, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://jurisprudencia.oab.org.br/
[34] Jusbrasil, “Jusbrasil. Conectando pessoas a Justiça [Jusbrasil. Connecting people to Justice (free translation)].” Accessed: Sep. 06,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.jusbrasil.com.br/home
[35] LexML, “LexML Brasil: Rede de informaç~ao legislativa e jurıdica
[LexML Brazil: Network of legislative and legal information (free
translation)].” Accessed: Sep. 06, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.lexml.gov.br
[36] Bluetick, “Bluetick | Vinden zonder zoeken [Bluetick | Find without searching (free translation)].” Accessed: Sep. 06, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.bluetick.nl/
[37] Finch Platform, “Finch - Simplificando o mundo jurıdico [Finch Simplifying the legal world (free translation)].” Accessed: Sep. 06,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://finchsolucoes.com.br/
[38] Thomson Reuters, “Legal One, a soluç~ao jurıdica que se adequa a
sua realidade [Legal One, the legal solution that suits your reality
(free translation)].” Accessed: Sep. 06, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.thomsonreuters.com.br/pt/juridico/legal-one.
html
[39] Lexis, “Lexis - Online legal research.” Accessed: Sep. 06, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.lexisnexis.com/en-us/products/
lexis.page

3119

[40] Thomson Reuters, “Westlaw - Legal research tools & platforms.”
Accessed: Sep. 06, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://legal.
thomsonreuters.com/en/products/westlaw
[41] Casetext, “Compose: Craft exceptional briefs, without the busy
work.” Accessed: Sep. 06, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://
compose.law/
[42] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach,
R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, Eds., Curran Associates, Inc., vol. 30, pp. 5998–6008, 2017.
[43] J. Falc~ao, P. Cerdeira, and D. Arguelhes, “I relat
orio do supremo
em n
umeros-o m
ultiplo supremo [1st supreme in numbers report
- the supreme multiple (free translation)],” Revista de Direito
Administrativo, vol. 262, pp. 399–452, 2013.
[44] Q. Le and T. Mikolov, “Distributed representations of sentences
and documents,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2014,
pp. 1188–1196.
[45] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, ““Why should I trust
you?”: Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2016, pp. 1135–1144.
[46] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Anchors: High-precision
model-agnostic explanations,” in Proc. 32nd AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., 2018, pp. 1527–1535.
[47] S. Robertson, “Understanding inverse document frequency: On
theoretical arguments for IDF,” J. Documentation, vol. 60, no. 5,
pp. 503–520, 2004.
[48] I. Beltagy, M. E. Peters, and A. Cohan, “Longformer: The longdocument transformer,” 2020, arXiv:2004.05150.
[49] N. Halko, P. G. Martinsson, and J. A. Tropp, “Finding structure
with randomness: Probabilistic algorithms for constructing
approximate matrix decompositions,” SIAM Rev., vol. 53, no. 2,
pp. 217–288, 2011.
[50] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pretraining of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2019, arXiv:1810.04805.
[51] M. A. Hearst, S. T. Dumais, E. Osuna, J. Platt, and B. Sch€
olkopf,
“Support vector machines,” IEEE Intell. Syst. Appl., vol. 13, no. 4,
pp. 18–28, Jul./Aug. 1998.
[52] J. C. Platt, “Probabilistic outputs for support vector machines and
comparisons to regularized likelihood methods,” in Advances in
Large Margin Classifiers, A. J. Smola, P. Bartlett, B. Sch€
olkopf, and
D. Schuurmans, Eds. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1999,
pp. 61–74.
[53] T.-F. Wu, C.-J. Lin, and R. C. Weng, “Probability estimates for
multi-class classification by pairwise coupling,” J. Mach. Learn.
Res., vol. 5, pp. 975–1005, 2004.
[54] J. Li, W. Monroe, and D. Jurafsky, “Understanding neural networks through representation erasure,” 2017, arXiv:1612.08220.
[55] S. Ali and K. A. Smith-Miles , “Improved support vector machine
generalization using normalized input space,” in Proc. 19th Australian Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2006, pp. 362–371.
[56] C. D. G. Linhares, J. R. Ponciano, J. G. S. Paiva, B. A. N. Travençolo, and L. E. C. Rocha, “Visualisation of structure and processes
on temporal networks,” in Temporal Network Theory, P. Holme and
J. Saram€aki, Eds. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2019, pp. 83–105.
[57] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan, “Latent Dirichlet
allocation,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 3, pp. 993–1022, 2003.
[58] A. Cichocki and A.-H. Phan, “Fast local algorithms for large scale
nonnegative matrix and tensor factorizations,” IEICE Trans. Fundam. Electron. Commun. Comput. Sci., vol. 92, no. 3, pp. 708–721,
2009.
[59] H. Kim and H. Park, “Sparse non-negative matrix factorizations
via alternating non-negativity-constrained least squares for microarray data analysis,” Bioinformatics, vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 1495–1502,
2007.
[60] D. Dueck, Q. D. Morris, and B. J. Frey, “Multi-way clustering of
microarray data using probabilistic sparse matrix factorization,”
Bioinformatics, vol. 21, no. suppl_1, pp. i144–i151, 2005.
[61] D3.js, “D3.js - Data-driven documents.” Accessed: Sep. 06, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://d3js.org
[62] M. Grinberg, Flask Web Development: Developing Web Applications
With Python. Newton, MA, USA: O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2018.
[63] F. Pedregosa et al., “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,”
J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011.
[64] S. Bird, E. Klein, and E. Loper, Natural Language Processing With
Python: Analyzing Text With the Natural Language Toolkit. Newton,
MA, USA: O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 12:52:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3120

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 29, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

[65] Elastic, “Elasticsearch: The official distributed search & analytics
engine.” Accessed: Sep. 06, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://
www.elastic.co/elasticsearch/.
[66] Brazilian Supreme Court, “Aplicaç~ao das S
umulas no STF S
umula Vinculante 37 [Application of STF Precedents - Binding Precedent #37 (free translation)],” 2014. Accessed: Mar. 30,
2021. [Online]. Available: http://www.stf.jus.br/portal/
jurisprudencia/menuSumario.asp?sumula¼1961
[67] J. Watts, “Operation Car Wash: Is this the biggest corruption
scandal in history?,” 2017. Accessed: Mar. 30, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jun/01/
brazil-operation-car-wash-is-this-the-biggest-corruption-scandalin-history
[68] Brazilian Supreme Court, “Ministro Edson Fachin e sorteado novo
relator da Lava-Jato [Justice Edson Fachin is appointed as new
rapporteur of cases involving the Car Wash operation (free translation)],” 2017. Accessed: Mar. 30, 2021. [Online]. Available:
http://www.stf.jus.br/portal/cms/verNoticiaDetalhe.asp?
idConteudo¼335003
[69] W. Zhu, W. Zhang, G.-Z. Li, C. He, and L. Zhang, “A study of
damp-heat syndrome classification using Word2vec and TF-IDF,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Bioinf. Biomed., 2016, pp. 1415–1420.
[70] Y. Wang, Z. Zhou, S. Jin, D. Liu, and M. Lu, “Comparisons and
selections of features and classifiers for short text classification,”
IOP Conf. Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng., vol. 261, 2017, Art. no. 012018.
[71] M. Avinash and E. Sivasankar, “A study of feature extraction techniques for sentiment analysis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Emerg. Technologies Data Mining Inf. Secur., Singapore: Springer, 2019, pp. 475–486.
[72] M. Zaheer et al., “Big Bird: Transformers for longer sequences,”
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato,
R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin, Eds., Curran Associates, Inc.,
vol. 2020, pp. 17283–17297, 2020.
[73] F. Souza, R. Nogueira, and R. Lotufo, “BERTimbau: Pretrained
BERT models for Brazilian Portuguese”,” in Proc. Braz. Conf. Intell.
Syst., 2020, pp. 403–417.
[74] J. Wei and K. Zou, “EDA: Easy data augmentation techniques for
boosting performance on text classification tasks,” in Proc. Conf.
Empir. Methods Natural Lang. Process. 9th Int. Joint Conf. Natural
Lang. Process., 2019, pp. 6382–6388.
[75] B. Krawczyk, “Learning from imbalanced data: Open challenges
and future directions,” Prog. Artif. Intell., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 221–232,
2016.
Lucas E. Resck received the BSc degree in
applied mathematics in 2021 from the School of
Applied Mathematics, Fundaç~
ao Getulio Vargas,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, where he is currently a
MSc student in mathematical modelling. His
research interests include machine learning, natural language processing, and machine learning
explainability.

Jean R. Ponciano received the BSc, MSc, and
PhD degrees in computer science from the Federal University of Uberlandia, Brazil, in 2012,
2016, and 2020, respectively. He is currently a
postdoctoral fellow with the School of Applied
~o Getulio Vargas, Brazil.
Mathematics, Fundaça
His research interests include information visualization, visual analytics, network science, and
data streams. He was a program committee
member or external reviewer in relevant conferences, including EuroVis and ASONAM.

Luis Gustavo Nonato (Member, IEEE) received
the PhD degree in applied mathematics from the
Pontificia Universidade Catolica do Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in 1998. He is currently a full professor with the Institute of Mathematical and Computer Sciences, University of
~o Carlos, Brazil. From 2017 to
S~
ao Paulo, Sa
2018, he was a visiting professor with the Center
for Data Science, New York University, New York.
From 2008 to 2010, he was a visiting scholar with
the Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City. His research interests include visualization, visual analytics, machine learning, and data science. Besides
serving in several program committees, including IEEE SciVis, IEEE
InfoVis, and EuroVis, he was an associate editor for Computer Graphics
Forum and IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics.
He was also the editor-in-chief of the SBMAC SpringerBriefs in Applied
Mathematics and Computational Sciences.

Jorge Poco (Member, IEEE) received the BE
degree in system engineering from the National
University of San Agustı́n, Peru, in 2008, the MSc
degree in computer science from the University
~o Paulo, Brazil, in 2010, and the PhD degree
of Sa
in computer science from New York University, in
2015. He is currently an associate professor with
~o
the School of Applied Mathematics, Fundaça
Getulio Vargas, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. His
research interests include data visualization,
visual analytics, machine learning, and data science. He was several program committees, including IEEE SciVis, IEEE
InfoVis, VAST, and EuroVis.
" For more information on this or any other computing topic,
please visit our Digital Library at www.computer.org/csdl.

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 12:52:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

