(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 2, 2021

A Meta Analysis of Attention Models on Legal
Judgment Prediction System
G.Sukanya1, J.Priyadarshini2
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Vellore Institute of Technology, Chennai Campus, Chennai, India

Abstract—Artificial Intelligence in legal research is
transforming the legal area in manifold ways. Pendency of court
cases is a long-lasting problem in the judiciary due to various
reasons such as lack of judges, lack of technology in legal services
and the legal loopholes. The judicial system has to be more
competent and more reliable in providing justice on time. One of
the major causes of pending cases is the lack of legal intelligence
to assist the litigants. The study in this paper reviews the
challenges faced by judgment prediction system due to lengthy
case facts using deep learning model. The Legal Judgment
prediction system can help lawyers, judges and civilians to
predict the win or loss rate, punishment term and applicable law
articles for new cases. Besides, the paper reviews current
encoding and decoding architecture with attention mechanism of
transformer model that can be used for Legal Judgment
Prediction system. Natural Language Processing using deep
learning is an exploring field and there is a need for research to
evaluate the current state of the art at the intersection of good
text processing and feature representation with a deep learning
model. This paper aims to develop a systematic review of existing
methods used in the legal judgment prediction system and about
the Hierarchical Attention Neural network model in detail. This
can also be used in other applications such as legal document
classification, sentimental analysis, news classification, text
translation, medical reports and so on.
Keywords—Legal judgment prediction; hierarchical attention
neural network; text processing; transformer

I.

INTRODUCTION

Legal Judgment Prediction (LJP) system helps in assisting
litigants and attorneys to improve their work and time
efficiency and reduce the risk of making mistakes with feasible
judgment suggestions, which includes the prediction of
charges, applicable law articles, and prison term based on the
case facts [1]. Some of the LJP frameworks predict final
judgment as a binary [2] and multilabel text classification [3]
for cases in English of European Court Human Rights and
Chinese Judgment Online dataset. One of the most important
challenges in LJP is unlabelled data and that was tackled using
the Long Short Term Memory framework [4] for Indian
Supreme Court judgments with headnotes. At the initial stages,
Machine Learning methods such as optimized Lasso
Regression [5] [6] for Chinese cases and then deep learning
models [7] [8] for automated judgment predictions were used.
Providing fair and timely justice by the courts is not only the
most important obligation of the country but is an important
characteristic of democracy [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14]. India
being the world‟s largest democracy is still in need of an
intelligent judicial system. It also benefits civilians to know the

possible judgment result before the trial by describing a case
they are concerned about for win or loss rate. Surveys show
that India has only twenty percent judges for every million
citizens [15] [16].
Following are the benefits of using deep learning in LJP
 Accelerated decision process and outcomes.
 Instant verification of input data.
 Unbiased point of view or opinion.
 Ability to quickly showcase historical cases with similar
patterns.
 Easier to spot corruption by identifying cases with high
variance in human and AI decisions.
Case Facts of the real World has two main challenges. One
is the difficulty faced in encoding lengthy documents and the
other is lack of full external information. Existing models used
for text classification and prediction like RNN and LSTM work
sequentially and takes a long duration in training large corpus
for the UK and Chinese court cases. Most of the LJP
framework consider judgment prediction as text classification
task while some works consider it as a Legal Reading
Comprehension [3]. Any text classification has two main
phases. The first phase is the representation of the document
and the latter is to use a good classifier model. Both are very
much important to give good prediction accuracy for new case
facts or queries. Earlier deep learning models used BOW (Bag
Of Words) and word embeddings, like Word2Vec, GloVe and
Fast Text for encoding.
Legal information such as legal cases, contracts, bills are
often represented in textual form. Processing of legal text is a
grooming area in the current era. In NLP, the legal text is being
utilized in various applications like “legal topic classification,
court opinion generation and analysis, legal information
extraction, legal interpretation and entity recognition” [17] [18]
[19] [20] [21] [22]. Models that predict the legal outcomes are
emerging for the past few years and these models aid the legal
practitioners and citizens with a reduction in the cost of legal
issues paves way for faster justice. The legal judgment
prediction model can be utilized by lawyers and judges to
predict the win or loss chance of a case [23] [24]. Human rights
organizations and legal research scholars can adapt them to
examine whether fair judicial decisions are given or are do they
correlate with biases.

531 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 2, 2021

This review aims to discuss one of the most effective deep
learning models (HAN) applicable to judgment predictions.
The other objectives to be covered in this article are:
 Classify and summarize recent works based on
empirical methods of LJP and conceptual literature of
text classification.
 Encoding and
transformer.

Decoding

architecture

using

a

 Showcase the important features and challenges of
existing LJP methods.
 Future Scope with various applications.
The following section of this article is organized as follows.
Section II briefs up the related work. In Section III, a review of
the HAN and Transformer model is done. Major Findings and
suggestions are revealed in Section IV. Finally, Section V
contains the conclusion.
II. BACKGROUND
Machine learning has begun to revolutionize various
industries already and it would aid India‟s legal system in
producing legal judgments with higher accuracy and precision.
If law firms/advocates in India use this AI application for risk
assessment for an out-of-court settlement/Alternative Dispute
Resolution (ADR) mechanism, the number of cases would
reduce and faster justice could be provided [25][26]. In India,
legal search engines use Artificial Intelligence for legal
analytics and visualization through its Case Map and
Taxonomy and it also provides an analysis of judge‟s
disposition through data analyzed by AI. Areas in legal that
already use ML are client due diligence and contract
management.
The problem of judgment prediction has taken a great
attraction in the legal research area. This section describes
Empirical Literature on Legal judgment Prediction methods,
Conceptual Literature on Text Classification Methods and
transformer model in detail.
A. Empirical Literature on Legal Judgment Prediction
Methods
Most of the legal judgment prediction research works were
classified using Binary Classification. Zhong et al. [1] have
introduced the TOPJUDGE, a topological multi-task learning
framework that shows the dependencies among subtasks of
case facts as a Directed Acyclic Graph. The challenge faced in
TOPJUDGE is that it failed to exhibit interaction between
subtasks. Besides, a Convolutional Neural Network-based
encoder was utilized to generate the fact descriptions. The
outcomes of the TOPJUDGE model are law articles, charges
and terms of penalty. TOPJUDGE exhibited a higher
consistency over the existing models.
A new HAN model with Google‟s Bidirectional Encoder
Representations from Transformers (BERT) was developed by
Chalkidis et al. [2] for the prediction of cases from the
European Court of Human Rights. A wide variety of neural
models like BiGRU-Att, HAN, LWAN, BERT and
Hierarchical BERT were evaluated on the proposed dataset.

The research work had surpassed the drawbacks of the existing
models and does (1) binary violation classification (2) multilabel classification (3) case importance prediction using
sentence scores. Long et al. [3] formulated the Legal Reading
Comprehension framework for the judgment predictions which
works based on answering the questions of Comprehension
rather than using the text classification method. This model
was developed to handle multiple and complex textual inputs.
Also, they have conceptualized the AutoJudge framework to
infuse law articles for judgment prediction. The results of
AutoJudge were better than the base model in terms of
consistency and reliability. The problem of unavailability of
labeled data for the prediction task is tackled by assigning
classes/scores to sentences in the training set, based on their
match with reference summary produced by humans using
LSTM by Anand et al. [4].
In 2020, Guo et al. [5] introduced the TenLa by blending
the concepts of both the tensor decomposition and an
optimized Lasso regression model. Based on the similarities
between legal cases the judgment charges were predicted. The
major process undergone in the proposed works was:
(a) ModTen to legal cases as three-dimensional tensors,
(b) ConTen to decompose tensors obtained by ModTen (c)
OLass, which was trained with the Core tensors got by
ConTen. The results of the TenLa had exhibited higher
accuracy than the traditional models.
Guo et al. [6] have preferred TenRR that amalgamates the
tensor decomposition and ridge regression for judgment
prediction of legal cases, and the proposed model had enclosed
three major contributions. In the initial contribution, RTenr was
developed as a tensor representation method to express the
legal cases as three-dimensional tensors. In the second
contribution, the ITend was introduced to decompose the
original tensors representing legal cases into core tensors. In
the contribution, the ORidge was built to construct an
optimized Lasso judgment prediction model for legal cases.
The results of the proposed work had exhibited higher accuracy
than traditional methods for judgment prediction.
Chen et al. [7] analyzed the case description and predicted
the judgment employing the deep learning model. The outcome
of the deep learning model was in the form of three aspects:
penalty, accusation and legal provisions. They predicted the
latter aspects based on the FastText and TextCNN method. The
resultant of the proposed judicial decision-making model was
more accurate and persuasive. Yang et al. [8] proposed a
Multi-Perspective Bi-Feedback Network. It had a word-level
attention mechanism based on the topology structure among
subtasks. Also a multi-perspective forward prediction and
backward verification framework were designed to make use
of the dependencies among multiple subtasks effectively. The
word collocations features of fact descriptions were integrated
into the proposed work to distinguish cases with similar
descriptions but different penalties. The resultant of the
proposed work had achieved significant improvements in terms
of prediction accuracy. Shang Li et al. [12] discussed a
Multichannel Attentive Neural Network(MANN) framework
which predicts applicable charges, punishment terms and
articles for Chinese court cases based on case facts for single
defendant person using two-tier hierarchical architecture. K.

532 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 2, 2021

Zhu et.al [22] proposed Sequential Generation Network using a
nested hierarchical attention mechanism for multi-charge
prediction with single case defendants.
Kongfan Zhu et al [34] proposed Transformer-HierarchicalAttention-Multi-Extra (THME) Network to extract the
semantics of external information of the fact for prediction of
Legal judgment based on multiple classes.
Jerrold sho et al [35] proposed a comparative study on NLP
methods against statistical models on 6227 novel Singapore
Supreme Court Judgments for the topic model, word
embedding, and language model.
Hui Wang et al [36] have designed the LJP framework
based on FastText and TextCNN for multilabel text
classification for accusation prediction.

TABLE I.
Author
[Citations]

Zhong et al. [1]

Chalkidis et al.
[2]

Long et al. [3]

B. Limitations
We see that most of the existing legal judgment prediction
system is applicable for a single defendant person and the
judgments are predicted only based on case facts. In the real
world, along with case facts, other external information such as
evidence and emotions play a vital role in judgment which is a
drawback found, which indirectly affects the prediction
accuracy of the judgment. Also the problem of unavailability
of structured legal data prone to an imbalanced dataset, gives a
biased prediction. The lengthy case fact also is found to be a
major challenge. Practically, Casefact with legal opinion comes
around 60 to 100 pages. So a great amount of time is spent on
extracting important points from them to make it into around
200 words per document either manually or by using a text
summarization tool for a basic RNN model to work on it. In
Table I, the features and challenges of existing Judgment
prediction works are enlisted.

FEATURES AND CHALLENGES OF EXISTING PREDICTION WORKS

Methodology

Data Sets Used

Features

Challenges

TOPJUDGE

CJO, PKU, and
CAIL.
CJO has criminal cases published by the
Chinese government from China
Judgement Online.
PKU contains criminal cases published by
Peking University Law Online
CAIL(Chinese AI and Law Challenge)

 integrates multiple subtasks and
make judgment predictions
through topological learning
framework
 judgment predictions through
topological framework
 neural encoder for fact
representation and subtasks with
DAG dependencies.

 Limited to work on single
defendants and charges.
 Need to explore how to infuse
temporal factor into LJP

English legal judgment prediction dataset

 binary violation classification of
articles
 multi-label classification of
charges
 case importance prediction using
sentence scores

 few-shot learning is not taken
into account
 need to break the problem of
charge prediction into
different subtasks

Chinese Referee Document Network

 captures the complex semantic
interactions among facts, pleas,
and laws based on legal reading
comprehension framework
 Improved F1 score, accuracy and
precision

 don‟t have access to
groundtruth law articles
 increases the computational
complexity
 reduces the accuracy and
stability
 Higher cost
 Higher computational
complexity
 Need sentence simplification
approaches for complex and
long sentences

HAN model with BERT

AutoJudge

Anand et al. [4]

neural network

Indian Supreme Court Judgments (1947 to
1993)

 tackles the problem of
unavailability of labeled data
 Uses Feed Forward Neural
Network and Long Short Term
Memory for case text
summarization

Guo et al. [5]

TenLa

3,000,000 legal cases in the past five years
from multiple provinces and cities in China

 higher accuracy
 removes redundant, meaningless,
and inaccurate information

 Need to prevent over fitting
 Complex

 Need to improve the accuracy
of predictions

Guo et al. [6]

TenRR

Chinese Referee Document Network

 greatly reduce the dimension of
original tensors
 Removal of the meaningless and
inaccurate information in original
tensors

Baogui Chen et
al. [7]

FastText and TextCNN

CAIL 2018 data set

 more accurate and persuasive
decision-making
 Better in accuracy, and recall rate

 Need to improve the accuracy
of model prediction

Yang et al. [8]

Multi-Perspective based
BiFeedback Network
(MPBFN) and a Word
Collocation Attention
(WCA) mechanism

Chinese AI and Law challenge
(CAIL2018)

 improves the overall performance
 improve the performance of
multitasking

 Need to reduce the
misjudgment of penalty
prediction

533 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 2, 2021

C. Conceptual Literature on Text Classification Methods
Before applying text classification methods text
preprocessing has to be done. Preprocessing of raw text data
gives good results on classification
1) Based on text preprocessing: Jin Wang et al [37] in
2019 implemented a regional CNN with LSTM model which
comprises of two parts: to predict the Valency Arousal ratings
of texts on Stanford Sentiment Treebank 1 dataset. The local
information within the sentences is observed using regional
CNN and long-distance dependencies are extracted by using
LSTM across sentences that can be considered in the prediction
process. Hao Fei et al [38] in 2020 finds multiple emotions
using text as a multilabel classification problem using
variational autoencoder and capsule module, to extract rich
features in a sentence. Latent Topic attention-based routing
algorithm is used in capsule module for pertaining the task.
Zhang et al [39] in 2019 proposed a coordinated CNN-LSTM
attention model to capture meaningful emotional dependent
information, where filters of different widths are used in
between word representation and pooling unit to get semantic
information. Hao Peng et al [40] in 2019 uses a graphical
capsule neural network model to capture rich information
through a routing mechanism. This type of neural network
model is found to be better than LSTM-RNN while
considering long-term dependency. Zhongqing Wang et al [41]
proposed the Hierarchical Attention Model in 2020 using
Linguistic Attention based on argument representation,
dependency representation and sentiment representation to
extract meaningful words.
Word segmentation and tokenization are the initial steps in
Natural Language Processing. The raw content of case fact
description has to be preprocessed according to the application
we choose. Mingjie Ling et al [46] use ELMo(Embeddings
from Language Models) word embedding Language Model to
overcome polysemy phenomena in word representation. The
work of researchers Matthew E Peters et al [47] has proved that
ELMO word embeddings are good to avoid polysemy
phenomena than Skip-gram models and other word
embeddings, like word2vec and GloVe which were widely
used earlier. The main advantage of ELMo is that they have
different word vectors under different contexts for the same
word.
D. Transformer Model
Transformers which are at their budding stage in the
application can be replaced for other methods in encoding and
decoding text representation. They are pre-trained word
embedding models used for text summarization and translation.
Original transformer models have a large number of
parameters and are compute-intensive. Also, they can be used
for fixed-length documents only. Some of the transformer
models are G-BERT, BioBERT, M-Bert, Trans-Bert, Clinical
BERT, etc.
Jacob Devlin et al [42] in 2019 proposed deep bidirectional transformers by smoothing the existing pre-trained
BERT model by adding one additional output layer, which is

simple and powerful compared to the existing RNN models.
Zhenzhong Lan et al [43] in 2020 proposed A Lite BERT
which is better than BERT in terms of less memory
consumption of the model by using two parametric reduction
techniques. Chi Sun et al [44] in 2020 worked on different
types of fine-tuning like single task and multitask tuning of
parameters of the BERT for text classification. The tuned
hyperparameters were then applied on eight different datasets
and analyses were done. Zihang Dai et al [45] in 2020
proposed an attention model using XLnet which could learn
80% more dependency than RNN and better than existing
vanilla transformers. The drawback is that the transformer
model is highly compute-intensive and that it has a little
struggle in handling negative sentences [47].
III. HAN AND TRANSFORMER MODEL
Recurrent Neural Networks in deep learning models were
widely used in Natural language processing tasks. Though it
can capture contextual information over long distances
compared to CNN, it suffers from the Vanishing Gradient and
Exploding Gradient problem. While passing the information
down between hidden layers during backpropagation, larger
derivatives increase exponentially and then explode eventually
creating Exploding Gradient problem. Similarly for smaller
derivatives, the gradient decreases and vanishes eventually
creating the Vanishing Gradient problem. To solve this
semantic bias CNN with the max-pooling stage is adopted to
get the most important information from text. Again
approaches using the basic CNN model cannot represent the
text semantically due to fixed window size. Other solutions for
vanishing and exploding gradient problems are reducing the
number of layers, by limiting the gradient size and by
considering random initialization of weights [48] between the
hidden layers. The gradient problems of RNNs were overcome
by long short-term neural networks (LSTMs). It captures the
contextual information of longer context in the documents than
basic RNN. But, LSTM works unidirectional and sequentially
which takes longer time consumption. This limitation in
unidirectional LSTM was overriden by using bidirectional
LSTMs, where we can read the context from both directions.
Nowadays attention mechanisms were infused in the existing
framework of RNN which is the hierarchical attention models.
In this survey importance of the Hierarchical Attention Neural
Network and transformer model has been studied and analyzed.
A. HAN
In NLP, the advancement in machine learning is making
the decision-making capability a more relevant one. Bots in the
market are already used to „smart search‟ existing judgments
and rulings to help in the preparation of a new case. Most of
the existing judgment prediction models reviewed by
researchers are based on traditional machine learning
algorithms [28].
Nowadays, attention mechanism has been used in deep
learning across a wide variety of contexts ranging from image
captioning, image generation, and language modeling and
translation. Hence, in the judgment prediction model, the
attention mechanism is used to extract important words from
the lengthy document, by assigning more weights to them.

534 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 2, 2021

with language models is at its budding stage in all NLP tasks.
The Attention mechanism makes transformers have extremely
long-term memory. A transformer model can remember all
previously generated tokens that have been generated. Also,
they have infinite reference windows, thereby overcoming the
short reference window of RNN. It is an encoder-decoder
architecture. The inputs given into the encoder are represented
as a continuous vector.
The main benefit of using transformer-based models are:
1) The input tokens are not processed sequentially one by
one as in RNN, rather the full sequence is taken as one input at
a single shot.
2) Also labeled data is not necessary. Just giving a large
amount of unlabeled data is enough to train a transformerbased model.
Bidirectional Encoder Representation Transformer (BERT)
is a multiheaded attention-based encoder-decoder used as a
pre-trained model for the word to a vector representation. It can
be applied for Legal Judgment prediction which is based on
lengthy case facts in an efficient way [2]. Fig. 2 shows the
steps used in BERT architecture.
Fig. 1. General Architecture of Hierarchical Attention Network (HAN).

A hierarchical attention model is used in modeling the
hierarchical relationships of words and sentences in a
document for document classification. The Hierarchical
Attention Network (HAN) [10] [22] [26] [27] [29] [30] [31]
[32] [33] is a deep-neural-network that is utilized for
Document Classification. A HAN attempts to classify a
document based on the knowledge it can infer about the
document from its composite parts, in other words, the
sentences and words that make up the document. The
„hierarchical‟ in HAN comes from the design that this
knowledge is built hierarchically, starting from using the words
in a sentence and followed by using the sentences in a
document [29].
The overall architecture of the Hierarchical Attention
Network (HAN) is shown in Fig. 1. It consists of several parts:
“a word sequence encoder, a word-level attention layer, a
sentence encoder and a sentence-level attention layer”. The
word vectors are encoded using the word sequence encoder and
the word-level attention layer is utilized for aggregating the
information of the informative words that do not contribute
equally. Then, the sentence vectors are encoded in the word
sequence encoder and the sentence level attention mechanism
is utilized to reward attention (weights) to the sentences that
are clues to correctly classify a document.
B. Transformer Model Architecture
Transformers have taken a vivid shape in NLP since 2019.
Researchers use transformers nowadays in NLP while using
RNN, LSTM, GRU, etc. Integration of transformer models

1) The input is fed into a word embedding layer where
ever word is mapped into a vector and a lookup table is formed
2) Positional information is sent into embeddings since the
encoder of the transformer doesn‟t have it. Sine and Cosine
functions are used for positional encoding, at every even and
odd index.
3) Encoder layer has the information for the entire
sequence. It contains two subgroups. Multiheaded attention and
then a Fully Connected Network. Multiheaded attention model
uses a self-attention mechanism, i.e. it relates each word in
input to other words. Query, key and Value factors are used to
create a self-attention mechanism.
4) A dot product between Query and the key value is done
to produce a score matrix. This gives a clue about how much
importance should be given to each word in a sentence. Greater
the score, the more important those words are. Thus queries are
mapped to keys.
5) On the scaled score, a Softmax is applied which gives
attention weights between 0 and 1.After doing this, greater
scores are made still higher and vice-versa.
6) Multiply the above Softmax output with the value
vector, which gives the output vector.
7) Decoder layer is also similar to the encoder layer and it
has two multiheaded attention layers and a feedforward layer.
It is appended with the linear layer that acts as a classifier and a
Softmax is applied to get the probabilities of words. Masking is
done to make all the negative values represented as zero.

535 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 2, 2021

transformer model, it is advised to fine-tune the architecture
according to the needs of the application. BERT has its own
limitations [26]. Firstly, it fails to capture longer-term
dependency beyond the predefined context length. The
maximum length of the sequence for BERT is 512 tokens
which have to be taken into consideration. For shorter
sequence padding has to be done and for longer sequence, the
sentence has to be trimmed. Secondly, it struggles in handling
negative sentences. Thirdly, it is unable to generalize to
positions beyond those undergone for training.
There are different types of transformer models available.
Though BERT has been renowned as the most efficient one on
many NLP tasks, now it's overrun by XLNet from Google.
XLNet uses the permutation language modeling concept in a
sentence. CamemBERT is used mainly for legal tasks enduring
with Part Of Speech tagging and Named Entity Recognition
with less number of parameter compared to basic BERT, which
in turn takes less time for computation. Pappagari et al. [26]
proposed fine tuned BERT models such as Transformer over
BERT(ToBERT) and Recurrence over BERT(RoBERT)
methods for classification of long documents which performed
better than pre-trained BERT. Therefore we suggest using
HAN with fine-tuned transformer model for future endeavors
in judgment predictions.
V. CONCLUSIONS

Fig. 2. Transformer Model.

IV. MAJOR FINDINGS
The explanation given in section III conveys the working
procedure of HAN without transformer models and
Transformer models with attention mechanism in a detailed
way.
Hierarchical attention models are used mainly to
automatically read and extract information from case facts
efficiently. They differ from classic sequence to sequence
model in two main ways. Most of the hierarchical model has
two-tier architecture one for word attention vector and the
other for sentence attention vector. The Encoder passes more
data to the decoder instead of passing the last hidden state of
the encoding stage, which turns to be advantageous than RNN.
It consumes more time to train word embedding for a particular
application if we use an attention model without transformers.
Traditional RNN needs labeled data for the word which is not
necessary if we use the pre-trained transformer model.
Attention mechanism with transformer model also has its
pits and falls. The main benefits are it can cope up with any
application using its good contextualized inbuilt word
embedding which supports large words. A pre-trained transfer
model in word to vector representation proves to be a timesaving one. On the other hand, original transformer(BERT)
models are very big which are prone to intense computation.
Due to the large number of parameters present in the

The purpose of this review was to identify an effective deep
learning model used for judgment predictions. Based on the
analysis conveyed integration of Hierarchical Attention Neural
network models with fine-tuned transformer concept will give
an efficient improvement based on quality and time in
judgment prediction. Also, the improvement of multilabel
classification for complex case facts with multiple defendants
and charges still needs further investigation. A future
exploration into the following legal areas such as
summarization of legal judgment, legal data curation, and legal
document simplification could be very much useful for the
legal society.
[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

REFERENCES
Haoxi Zhong, Zhipeng Guo∗ , Cunchao Tu, Chaojun Xiao, Zhiyuan
Liuy , Maosong Sun,"Legal Judgment Prediction via Topological
Learning",Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing,pp.3540–3549,2018.
Ilias Chalkidis, Ilias Chalkidi and Nikolaos Aletras, "Neural Legal
Judgment Prediction in English",arXiv:1906.02059v1 [cs.CL],Jun 2019.
Shangbang Long, Cunchao Tu, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun,"Automatic
Judgment
Prediction
via
Legal
Reading
Comprehension",arXiv:1809.06537v1 [cs.AI],Sep 2018.
Deepa Anand, Rupali Wagh,"Effective Deep Learning Approaches for
Summarization of Legal Texts",Journal of King Saud University Computer and Information Sciences,2019.
Xiaoding Guo,Hongli Zhang, Lin Ye,Shang Li,"TenLa: an approach
based on controllable tensor decomposition and optimized lasso
regression for judgement prediction of legal cases",Applied
Intelligence,2020.
X. Guo, H. Zhang, L. Ye, S. Li and G. Zhang, "TenRR: An Approach
Based on Innovative Tensor Decomposition and Optimized Ridge
Regression for Judgment Prediction of Legal Cases," in IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 167914-167929, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2999522.
Baogui Chen,Yu Li,Shu Zhang, Hao Lian,"A Deep Learning Method for
Judicial Decision Support",IEEE 19th International Conference on
Software Quality, Reliability and Security Companion (QRS-C),2019.

536 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 2, 2021
[8]

Wenmian Yang, Weijia Jia, Xiaojie Zhou and Yutao Luo,"Legal
Judgment
Prediction
via
Multi-Perspective
Bi-Feedback
Network",Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-19),2019.
[9] D. Huang and W. Lin, "A Model for Legal Judgment Prediction Based
on Multi-model Fusion," 2019 3rd International Conference on
Electronic Information Technology and Computer Engineering
(EITCE), Xiamen, China, pp. 892-895, 2019.
[10] S. Li, B. Liu, L. Ye, H. Zhang and B. Fang, "Element-Aware Legal
Judgment Prediction for Criminal Cases with Confusing Charges," 2019
IEEE 31st International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence
(ICTAI), Portland, OR, USA, , pp. 660-667, 2019.
[11] C. Wang and X. Jin, "Study on the Multi-Task Model for Legal
Judgment Prediction," 2020 IEEE International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Computer Applications (ICAICA), Dalian, China, pp.
309-313, 2020.
[12] S. Li, H. Zhang, L. Ye, X. Guo and B. Fang, "MANN: A Multichannel
Attentive Neural Network for Legal Judgment Prediction," in IEEE
Access,
vol.
7,
pp.
151144-151155,
2019.
doi:
10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2945771.
[13] L. Chen, N. Xu and Y. Wang, "Legal Judgment Prediction with Label
Dependencies," 2020 IEEE Intl Conf on Dependable, Autonomic and
Secure Computing, Intl Conf on Pervasive Intelligence and Computing,
Intl Conf on Cloud and Big Data Computing, Intl Conf on Cyber
Science
and
Technology
Congress
(DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/CyberSciTech), Calgary, AB, Canada,
[14] L. Yuan et al., "Automatic Legal Judgment Prediction via Large
Amounts of Criminal Cases," 2019 IEEE 5th International Conference
on Computer and Communications (ICCC), Chengdu, China, pp. 20872091.pp. 361-365, 2020.
[15] R. Sil and A. Roy, "A Novel Approach on Argument based Legal
Prediction Model using Machine Learning," 2020 International
Conference on Smart Electronics and Communication (ICOSEC),
Trichy, India, pp. 487-490, 2020.
[16] X. Yang, G. Shi, J. Lou, S. Wang and Z. Guo, "Interpretable Charge
Prediction with Multi-Perspective Jointly Learning Model," 2019 IEEE
5th International Conference on Computer and Communications
(ICCC), Chengdu, China, pp. 1850-1855, 2019.
[17] V. G. Pillai and L. R. Chandran, "Verdict Prediction for Indian Courts
Using Bag of Words and Convolutional Neural Network," 2020 Third
International Conference on Smart Systems and Inventive Technology
(ICSSIT), Tirunelveli, India, pp. 676-683, 2020.
[18] C. Jin, G. Zhang, M. Wu, S. Zhou and T. Fu, "Textual content prediction
via fuzzy attention neural network model without predefined
knowledge," in China Communications, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 211-222,
June 2020.
[19] T. Goto, K. Sano and S. Tojo, "Modeling Predictability of Agent in
Legal Cases," 2016 IEEE International Conference on Agents (ICA),
Matsue, pp. 13-18, 2016.
[20] Y. Yin, F. Zulkernine and S. Dahan, "Determining Worker Type from
Legal Text Data using Machine Learning," 2020 IEEE Intl Conf on
Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing, Intl Conf on Pervasive
Intelligence and Computing, Intl Conf on Cloud and Big Data
Computing, Intl Conf on Cyber Science and Technology Congress
(DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/CyberSciTech), Calgary, AB, Canada, pp.
444-450, 2020.
[21] K. Kowsrihawat, P. Vateekul and P. Boonkwan, "Predicting Judicial
Decisions of Criminal Cases from Thai Supreme Court Using Bidirectional GRU with Attention Mechanism," 2018 5th Asian
Conference on Defense Technology (ACDT), Hanoi, pp. 50-55, 2018.
[22] K. Zhu, B. Ma, T. Huang, Z. Li, H. Ma and Y. Li, "Sequence Generation
Network Based on Hierarchical Attention for Multi-Charge Prediction,"
in IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 109315-109324, 2020.
[23] B. Chen, Y. Li, S. Zhang, H. Lian and T. He, "A Deep Learning Method
for Judicial Decision Support," 2019 IEEE 19th International
Conference on Software Quality, Reliability and Security Companion
(QRS-C), Sofia, Bulgaria, , pp. 145-149, 2019.
[24] J. Guo, B. Wu and P. Zhou, "BLHNN: A Novel Charge Prediction
Model Based on Bi-Attention LSTM-CNN Hybrid Neural Network,"

2020 IEEE Fifth International Conference on Data Science in
Cyberspace (DSC), Hong Kong, Hong Kong , pp. 246-252, 2020.
[25] Chang Yin,Cuiqing Jiang,Zhao Wang,"Evaluating the credit risk of
SMEs using legal judgments",Decision Support Systems,2020.
[26] Raghavendra Pappagari, Piotr ˙Zelasko, Jes´us Villalba, Yishay Carmiel,
and Najim Dehak,"Hierarchical Transformers For Long Document
Classification", arXiv:1910.10781v1 [cs.CL] 23 Oct 2019.
[27] Luo, B., Feng, Y., Xu, J., Zhang, X., & Zhao, D. (2017). Learning to
Predict Charges for Criminal Cases with Legal Basis. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.09168.
[28] Rafe Athar Shaikh,Tirath Prasad Sahu,Veena Anand,"Predicting
Outcomes of Legal Cases based on Legal Factors using
Classifiers",Procedia Computer Science,2020.
[29] D. Huang and W. Lin, "A Model for Legal Judgment Prediction Based
on Multi-model Fusion," 3rd International Conference on Electronic
Information Technology and Computer Engineering (EITCE), Xiamen,
China, pp. 892-895,2019.
[30] Sajad Mousavi,Fatemeh Afghah,U. Rajendra Acharya,"HAN-ECG: An
interpretable atrial fibrillation detection model using hierarchical
attention networks",Computers in Biology and Medicine,2020.
[31] Fa Li,Zhipeng Gui,Yichen Lei,"A hierarchical temporal attention-based
LSTM
encoder-decoder
model
for
individual
mobility
prediction",Neurocomputing, 2020.
[32] Yirong Zhou,Jun Li,Luo Chen,"A spatiotemporal hierarchical attention
mechanism-based model for multi-step station-level crowd flow
prediction",Information Sciences,2021-33.
[33] Shuning Xing,Fang‟ai Liu,Tianlai Li,"A hierarchical attention model for
rating
prediction
by
leveraging
user
and
product
reviews",Neurocomputing,2019 -34.
[34] Kongfan Zhu, Rundong Guo , Weifeng Hu, Zeqiang Li, and Yujun Li
“Legal Judgment Prediction Based on Multiclass Information Fusion”
,in Hindawi Complexity Volume 2020, Article ID 3089189, 12
pages,https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/3089189.
[35] Jerrold sho, Legal Area Classification: “A Comparative Study of Text
Classifiers on Singapore Supreme Court Judgments” Domains
@agc.gov.sg @smu.ac.in.
[36] Hui Wang, Tieke He, Zhipeng Zou, Siyuan Shen, Yu Li “Using Case
Facts to predict accusation based on deep learning”,in 2019 IEEE 19th
International Conference on Software Quality, Reliability and Security
Companion (QRS-C).
[37] Jin Wang, Liang-Chih Yu, Member, IEEE, K. Robert Lai, and Xuejie
Zhang 11 December 2019, “Tree-Structured Regional CNN-LSTM
Model for Dimensional Sentiment Analysis”, Published in: IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing ( Volume: 28
) pp: 581 – 591,Date of Publication: 11 December 2019 doi:
10.1109/TASLP.2019.2959251,Publisher: IEEE.
[38] Hao Fei, Yue Zhang, Yafeng Ren, and Donghong Ji,”Topic-Enhanced
Capsule Network for Multi-Label Emotion Classification”, Published in:
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing (
Volume: 28) Page(s): 1839 – 1848 Date of Publication: 10 June 2020
doi: 10.1109/TASLP.2020.3001390 Publisher: IEEE.
[39] Zhang Yangsen, Zheng Jia1 , Jiang Yuru, Huang Gaijuan And Chen
Ruoyu ,“A Text Sentiment Classification Modeling Method Based on
Coordinated CNN-LSTM-Attention Model” Published in: Chinese
Journal of Electronics ( Volume: 28 , Issue: 1 , 1 2019 )Page(s): 120 –
126,Date
of
Publication:
22
August
2019,doi:
10.1049/cje.2018.11.004,Publisher: IET.
[40] Hao Peng, Senzhang Wang,Lihon Wong,Qiron Gong,“Hierarchical
Taxonomy-Aware and Attentional Graph Capsule RCNNs for LargeScale Multi-Label Text Classification”, Published in: IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge and Data Engineering ( Early Access )Page(s):1–1,
2019,doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2019.2959991,Publisher: IEEE.
[41] Zhongqing Wang , Qingying Sun, Shoushan Li, Qiaoming Zhu, and
Guodong Zhou, “Neural Stance Detection With Hierarchical Linguistic
Representations”, Published in: IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio,
Speech, and Language Processing ( Volume: 28)Page(s):635–645,Date
of
Publication:
03
January
2020,doi:
10.1109/TASLP.2020.2963954,Publisher: IEEE.

537 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 2, 2021
[42] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova,
“BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
understanding”, Anthology ID:N19-1423 Volume:Proceedings of the
2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long and Short Papers),June 2019, Minneapolis, Minnesota,
Publisher:Association
for
Computational
Linguistics,
doi:10.18653/v1/N19-1423.
[43] Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman1 Kevin Gimpel,
Piyush Sharma Radu Soricut,”ALBERT: A Lite Bert For SelfSupervised
Learning
Of
Language
Representations”
in
arXiv:1909.11942v6 [cs.CL] 9 Feb 2020.
[44] Chi Sun, Xipeng Qiu, Yige Xu, and Xuanjing Huang, “How to fine-tune
BERT for text classification?” , in arXiv:1905.05583v3 [cs.CL] 5 Feb
2020.

[45] Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Quoc V. Le2,
Ruslan Salakhutdinov Carnegie Mellon University,GoogleBrain
“Transformer-XL: Attentive Language Models Beyond a Fixed-Length
Count”, arXiv:1901.02860v3 [cs.LG]2 Jun 2019.
[46] Mingjie Ling; Qiaohong Chen; Qi Sun; Yubo Jia,”Hybrid Neural
Network for Sina Weibo Sentiment Analysis”, Published in: IEEE
Transactions on Computational Social Systems ( Volume: 7, Issue: 4,
Aug. 2020),Page(s): 983 – 990,doi: 10.1109/TCSS.2020.2998092 .
[47] Matthew E Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner,
Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2018. “Deep
contextualized
word
representations”
in
arXiv,preprint
arXiv:1802.05365.
[48] J. Zhang, T. He, S. Sra, and A. Jadbabaie. Why gradient clipping
accelerates training: A theoretical justification for adaptivity (2020),
ICLR2020.

538 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

