Artificial Intelligence Review (2021) 54:1087–1115
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-020-09870-1

A survey of sentiment analysis in the Portuguese language
Denilson Alves Pereira1
Published online: 6 July 2020
© Springer Nature B.V. 2020

Abstract
Sentiment analysis is an area of study that aims to develop computational methods and
tools to extract and classify the opinions and emotions expressed by people on social networks, blogs, forums, online shoppings, and others. A lot of research has been developed
addressing opinions expressed in the English language. However, studies involving the
Portuguese language still need to be advanced to make better use of the specificities of
the language. This paper aims to survey the efforts made specifically to address sentiment
analysis in the Portuguese language. It categorizes and describes state of the art works
involving approaches to each of the tasks of sentiment analysis, as well as supporting language resources such as natural language processing tools, lexicons, corpora, ontologies,
and datasets.
Keywords Sentiment analysis · Opinion mining · Natural language processing · Portuguese
language

1 Introduction
User-written opinions in product, service, or event reviews have great commercial value.
They assist other users in decision making, such as purchasing a new product, and are very
useful for companies in monitoring their products/services, promoting better relationships
with their customers, developing better marketing strategies, improving and innovating
their products/services. However, the challenge is to automatically process a large amount
of data and provide a summary of the considerations encountered.
Sentiment analysis is an area of study that aims to find computational solutions to extract
and analyze people’s opinions and emotions about an entity and its different aspects, and
to identify the sentiment expressed in those opinions. Good surveys on the subject were
written by Cambria et al. (2013), Cambria (2016), Chaturvedi et al. (2018), Medhat et al.
(2014), Yadollahi et al. (2017) and Zhang and Liu (2014).
Identify and extract sentiments of natural language is not a trivial task, as it requires
a thorough understanding of syntactic and semantic rules of language. Opinion texts are
* Denilson Alves Pereira
denilsonpereira@ufla.br
1

Department of Computer Science, Federal University of Lavras, P.O. Box 3037,
Lavras 37.200‑900, Brazil

13

Vol.:(0123456789)

1088

D. A. Pereira

generally informal and contain slang, ironies, sarcasms, abbreviations and emoticons,
which makes their analysis even harder. To discover and retrieve information and opinions
from vast textual sources, sentiment analysis uses data mining, information retrieval, and
natural language processing (NLP) techniques.
Sentiment analysis for the English language is well advanced (Soleymani et al. 2017;
Cambria et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018). However, English-speaking users represented
only about 25% of Internet users worldwide in April 2019.1 The potential for applications involving sentiment analysis in different languages is vast. However, the linguistic
resources available for sentiment analysis in other languages are still limited. One approach
to address this deficiency and also allow applications supporting multiple languages simultaneously is multilingual sentiment analysis (Araújo et al. 2020; Lo et al. 2017). The main
techniques used are the automatic translation of the target language datasets into English
and the subsequent use of the methods and resources available to English, or the use of
parallel corpora, which does not require a translation machine. Such strategies have shown
better results than specific language efforts, however, they are still limited to languages
with scarce linguistic resources.
In addition, languages have sentiment specific knowledge, expressed through slangs,
idioms and local culture. The strategies used for multilingual sentiment analysis often do
not capture this specific knowledge, since automatic translation is done through the use of
parallel corpora and the tools are trained to capture primarily the generic patterns shared
across languages (Chen et al. 2019).
Portuguese is one of the languages with few linguistic resources available (Lo et al.
2017), despite being among the top five languages used in the Web. It is the official language of Portugal, Brazil and several former colonies of Portugal, with approximately 290
million speakers worldwide.2 Portuguese evolved from Latin, and it is one of the languages
known as Romance Languages, along with Spanish, French, Italian, Romanian and others
(Harris and Vincent 2003). These languages have common characteristics, however they
have been influenced by other local languages. Italian is the closest phonetically to Latin,
Portuguese and French are the most distant. Portuguese emerged from Galician and suffered influences from the Lusitanian language. And the Portuguese of each of Portugal’s
former colonies was also influenced by local native languages.
The main effort to characterize the research on sentiment analysis for the Portuguese
language was made by Souza et al. (2016b). They performed a systematic mapping review
to identify the state of the art of text mining for the Portuguese language. In related works,
Pardo et al. (2010) described the stage of development of research on computational linguistics in Brazil, and da Silva Conrado et al. (2014) presented a survey of automatic term
extraction for Brazilian Portuguese.
This survey aims to cover the state of the art of research related to sentiment analysis
for the Portuguese language. Unlike previous works (Souza et al. 2016b; Pardo et al. 2010;
da Silva Conrado et al. 2014), which present statistical data or cover specific linguistic
resources, this survey aims to describe and categorize works related to sentiment analysis
more broadly. This includes discuss works that involve sentiment analysis approaches specific to the Portuguese language and its supporting resources, such as NLP tools, lexicons,

1

https​://www.inter​netwo​rldst​ats.com/stats​7.htm.
Portuguese is an official language in Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, East Timor, Equatorial Guinea, GuineaBissau, Macau, Mozambique, Portugal, and São Tomé and Príncipe.

2

13

A survey of sentiment analysis in the Portuguese language﻿	

1089

corpora, ontologies, taxonomies, and datasets. I present links to each resource and identify
the main research groups in the area.
This survey aims to contribute to research in the development of applications that
require specific resources of the Portuguese language, as well as to present resources that
can be used in multilingual sentiment analysis. The number of linguistic resources for the
Portuguese language has been growing in recent years, and I present works that evaluated
them for applications of sentiment analysis.
In the organization of the paper, I first chose to describe research related to linguistic
resources and auxiliary tools used in sentiment analysis. Then, I describe the works related
to the task of sentiment classification, which aims to identify the polarity of the opinion or
emotion expressed in the texts. And finally, I describe the works that deal with the granularity level of aspect, in which a greater detail of linguistic analysis is required.
The remainder of this document is organized as follows: Sect. 2 covers the main concepts involving the task of sentiment analysis. Section 3 presents resources and papers that
involve NLP tools, lexicons, datasets, and other linguistics resources. Section 4 discusses
works related to sentiment classification. Section 5 addresses the specific approaches for
aspect-based sentiment analysis. Section 6 discusses the challenges for the area. Finally,
Sect. 7 presents the conclusions.

2 Sentiment analysis overview
Sentiment analysis can be divided into two tasks: opinion mining and emotion mining
(Yadollahi et al. 2017). Opinion mining is related to the concept of opinion, identifying
its polarity as a degree of positivity or negativity, while emotion mining refers to the feeling of emotion, such as joy and sadness. The vast majority of sentiment analysis methods
available in the literature deal only with opinion mining. The task of mining emotion is
still little explored. Moreover, it is very common to find in the literature the terms sentiment analysis, opinion mining, and polarity classification being used to refer to the opinion
polarity classification subtask.
Sentiment analysis can be done at three levels of granularity: document, sentence, or
aspect (Medhat et al. 2014). At the document level, a sentiment is attributed to the document as a whole. At sentence level, a sentiment is attributed to each sentence in the
document. First, each sentence is classified as objective or subjective, and then only the
sentiment of those subjective sentences are classified. At the aspect level, the sentiment
regarding specific aspects of the entities are classified. Aspects can be features, attributes,
or components of an entity. First, we must identify the entity and its aspects, and then classify the opinion or emotions on each of its aspects. For example, the sentence “the smartphone screen image is great, but the battery is short-lived” describes the opinion on the
screen image and battery aspects of the smartphone entity.
In another example, consider the following review about a bakery from its review site:3
“I ordered a chicken it came a little raw but were tasty, has a lot of sweet opttions 2, I like
a lot, except the chicken LoL (original in Portuguese: Eu encomendei um frango veio meio
cru mas tava gostoso, tem varias opcpes de doce tb, gosto muito, menos do frango kkk)”.

3
https​://www.tripa​dviso​r.com.br/Resta​urant​_Revie​w-g2572​086-d6369​228-Revie​ws-Padar​ia_5_Estre​lasGuara​_Feder​al_Distr​ict.html.

13

1090

D. A. Pereira

Note that the text is informal, contains grammatical errors and abbreviations. An analysis at aspect level could identify the “chicken” aspect with a negative sentiment and the
“sweet” aspect with a positive sentiment. At the document or sentence level, the sentiments
are mixed and would need to be weighed in some way to reach a conclusion.
User comments may also contain ironies or sarcasms. In this case, the person states
the opposite of what he/she means, as in the example of the sentence: “What a fantastic
battery! It lasted 3 h” (referring to the battery of a new smartphone). Such expressions
are very difficult to disambiguate, even for humans. They reverse the polarity of sentiment
(Joshi et al. 2017; Rajadesingan et al. 2015).
Instead of giving a direct opinion about an entity or aspect, the user can compare it with
another, leaving an implicit opinion. Example: “I drove the Honda Civic, and it is not even
close to the Toyota Corolla”. Comparative opinions use comparative adverbs (e.g., more,
less, as ...as), superlative adverbs (e.g., the best, the worst, the simplest) and expressions
such as: not even close, exceed, prefer, the number one.
Sentiment analysis methods should take into account the context of the opinion. A word
like “small” may have different polarity depending on the context. For example, “very
small apartment” has a negative polarity in the evaluation of a property, but “small queue”
is positive in evaluating the service of a public office.
Most methods of sentiment analysis deal with opinions in text format. However, opinions can also be analyzed from audio and audiovisual content. This makes room for new
scopes of analysis, such as facial expressions, body movement, background music choice,
or color filters. This new range of possibilities is known as multimodal sentiment analysis
(Poria et al. 2016).
Existing approaches to sentiment analysis can be classified into knowledge-based techniques, statistical methods, and hybrid approaches (Cambria 2016). Knowledge-based
techniques aim to identify words or expressions indicative of sentiment in the input text,
which are contained in knowledge bases constructed from linguistic corpora, such as lexicons and WordNet. In addition to knowledge bases, these techniques also explore language
rules to better identify the context of the words. Thus, these techniques rely heavily on high
quality linguistic resources to achieve good results.
Statistical methods use machine learning algorithms, which are trained from linguistic
features extracted from texts. They are able to identify keywords related to sentiments, as
well as their frequencies of co-occurrences with other keywords. However, in general, they
are semantically weak and need a lot of data for training. Hybrid approaches combine both
knowledge-based techniques and statistical methods as a way to exploit the best of each
approach.
Deep learning is a powerful statistical method that uses artificial neural networks of
multiple layers applied to learning tasks, and it has become popular for sentiment analysis
(Zhang et al. 2018) and NLP tasks (Young et al. 2018). Deep learning is able to automatically extract useful features in NLP tasks, in contrast to the manually elaborated feature
engineering used in traditional machine learning. Many deep learning models in NLP use
documents represented as word embeddings as input features. The main idea is to represent words as feature vectors, which are able to capture semantic or syntactic dependencies
using a lower-dimensional dense vector space. The main distributed word representation
models are Word2Vec, GloVe, ELMo, FastText, and BERT.
Among the architectures for neural networks, capsule networks (Sabour et al. 2017;
Hinton et al. 2018) have shown good results for NLP and sentiment analysis applications
(Zhao et al. 2019; Dong et al. 2020). Capsule networks are capable of generalizing from
small datasets by extrapolation, and thus extract richer text features.

13

A survey of sentiment analysis in the Portuguese language﻿	

1091

The main focus of the developed sentiment analysis methods has been on the effectiveness of results. However, in the era of big data, the efficiency of methods should also be
taken into account. Ferreira and Pereira (2019) compared the efficiency of several methods
for sentiment analysis in a distributed computing environment.

2.1 Multilingual and Portuguese
Although most efforts to develop methods for sentiment analysis focus on the English language, there are several examples of research in other specific languages: Spanish (Zafra
et al. 2019), French (Ghorbel and Jacot 2011), Italian (Stranisci et al. 2016), Chinese (Peng
et al. 2017), among others.
Multilingual sentiment analysis techniques have been developed with the aim of analyzing data in different languages. Due to a lack of linguistic resources, these techniques
often address the transfer of knowledge from resource-rich to resource-poor languages.
Dashtipour et al. (2016) discussed existing approaches for multilingual sentiment analysis
and compared several of them on the same datasets. Balahur and Turchi (2013) evaluated
the joint use of training data from different languages translated into English, and showed
that this joint use significantly improves the results, especially those pertinent to the same
family of languages, in this case the romance languages Italian, French and Spanish.
In line with works that leverage on existing English language resources and machine
translation techniques, Araújo et al. (2016, 2020) evaluated sentence-level sentiment
polarity classification methods proposed for English and specific for other languages. The
assessment was made in specific datasets for fourteen languages, including Portuguese, and
the main result suggests that applying methods developed for the English language with
input text translated from the specific language to English may lead to better results than
the specific methods evaluated.
Lo et al. (2017) pointed out that the use of machine translation or parallel corpora is
ineffective for scarce resource languages. Chen et al. (2019) argued that even for more
resourceful languages, translation captures only generic patterns shared across languages,
and fails to obtain language-specific sentiment knowledge.
Language-specific knowledge includes abbreviations, slangs, idioms, and emojis, whose
translation may lose or even change the sentiments in language-specific expressions.
Table 1 illustrates some examples of user reviews containing Portuguese idioms and their
English translations using the Google translation machine. Note that the text translated into
English does not have the same meaning, losing the sentiment expressed in the original
review. Many idioms are common among Portuguese-speaking countries. However, others are quite specific to a country or region. In Table 1, the first three idioms are typical of
Brazil, and the last, of Portugal.
Related to Internet slangs and abbreviations, Table 2 illustrates some examples in Portuguese with their respective meanings. These slangs are widely used on social media to
express sentiments.
Emojis also have different meanings in different cultures. For example, clapping hands
emojis in Western culture are used to show praise or offer congratulations, while in China
they imply sexual intercourse. The thumbs-up symbol, which is used as a sign of approval
in the West, has been interpreted as vulgar and even offensive in Greece and the Middle

13

13
The restaurant’s food is from here!

A comida do restaurante está daqui!

The corruption case ended up closed without the punishment
of the politician
Very good and tasty

Create confusion in public, arguing or fighting with someone

From medium to bad quality

Half-mouthed smartphone
I arrived at the hotel, the room was not ready, I set up
the biggest shack
The politician’s investigation ended in pizza

Smartphone meia-boca

Meaning in Portuguese

Translation to English

Cheguei no hotel, o quarto não estava pronto, armei o
maior barraco
A investigação do político acabou em pizza

Review

Table 1  Examples of reviews using Portuguese idioms (in italics), their translation to English by Google Translator, and the meaning of the idioms

1092
D. A. Pereira

1093

A survey of sentiment analysis in the Portuguese language﻿	
Table 2  Examples of slangs and abbreviations in Portuguese and their meanings
Slang/abbreviation Meaning
kkk

Used for laughing, same as LoL in English. The sound of kkk resembles someone
laughing. More k’s added to the kkkkk means you found it funnier

rs

Same as kkk, but less intense (rsrsrs—funnier). Abbreviation of the word “risos”
(laughs)
Fine, cool, ok, all good. Abbreviation of the word “beleza” (literally means beauty)
Saying “arrasou!” to someone it means you want to compliment him/her for something
he/she has done well, or even for his/her looks. “Arrasou” is the past tense of the
verb “arrasar” in the third person singular, and it means to destroy, to demolish

blz
arrasou

East.4 Since both Portuguese and English have origins in Western Europe, most emojis and
emoticons used in Portuguese-speaking countries are interpreted in the same way as those
in English. However, there are exceptions. In Brazil, the “OK” hand gesture is considered
as an insult, it is equivalent to giving the middle finger in USA.
From a grammatical point of view, Portuguese in African countries is closer to European than Brazilian Portuguese. However, African countries also speak other languages
and dialects. Mozambique, for example, has 20 local languages, and Portuguese, despite
being the official language, is spoken by only 40% of the population. In Angola, there
are 11 languages and several dialects that influence local Portuguese. Petter (2008) analyzed the lexicon shared by Angolan, Brazilian and Mozambican Portuguese, highlighting
convergences and divergences in semantic form and interpretation. In 1990, Portuguesespeaking countries signed the Portuguese Language Orthographic Agreement, which unified their spelling system. It has been implemented in each country, and is expected to be
completed in 2020.

3 Linguistic resources
Sentiment analysis approaches are highly dependent on the use of computational linguistics
and NLP tools, as they need to interpret texts in natural language. Thus, the development of
specific solutions for the Portuguese language is directly conditioned on the development
of linguistic resources for the language.
Pardo et al. (2010) described the computational linguistics in Brazil, highlighting the
research profile, the main research groups, and the main publication venues until the year
2010. According to them, language resources are still scarce and formal models that allow
linguistic analysis and description for the Portuguese language are lacking. Since then, the
area has developed and many new resources have been created.
The following subsections describe researches on NLP tools and linguistic resources
such as lexicons, datasets, corpus and ontologies.

4

https​://www.bbc.com/futur​e/artic​le/20181​211-why-emoji​-mean-diffe​rent-thing​s-in-diffe​rent-cultu​res.

13

1094

D. A. Pereira

3.1 Natural language processing tools
NLP is a research area that develops methods and tools for transforming human language
so that it is understood by computers. It is a subarea of computer science, artificial intelligence, and linguistics.
The most basic NLP tools are those for text preprocessing, useful for several data and
information extraction tasks, such as tokenization, multi-word grouping, lowercasing,
stemming, and lemmatization. Other more sophisticated tools include named entity recognition, part-of-speech tagging (PoS-tagging), syntactic structure dependency analysis,
coreference resolution, and semantic analysis.
Table 3 presents the main NLP tools for the Portuguese language. CoGrOO, Aelius, and
nlpnet were built for Brazilian Portuguese. NLTK has some modules trained with corpus in
Brazilian Portuguese. The others use the European Portuguese or both Brazilian and European Portuguese.
TreeTagger5 provides tools for PoS-tagging and lemmatization. It supports Portuguese
and several other languages (Schmid 1994).
Palavras6 provides a lexicon-based grammar parser with many functionalities for Portuguese (Bick 2000).
CoGrOO7 is a Brazilian Portuguese language grammar checker for LibreOffice and
OpenOffice.org. It provides the following functionalities: sentence boundary detector,
tokenizer, name finder, PoS-tagging, chunker, subject-verb finder, and grammar error
detector (Kinoshita et al. 2007).
LX-Center8 is a Web center of online linguistic services for the Portuguese language
(Branco et al. 2009). It provides the following functionalities: sentence splitting, tokenization, lemmatization, morphological analysis, PoS-tagging, named entity recognition,
among others.
Aelius9 is a software package that uses the NLTK library to offer facilities for PoStagging and chunking corpora (de Alencar 2010). It complements the features of the NLTK
with adaptations for Brazilian Portuguese.
FreeLing10 is a C++ library providing several functionalities for language text analysis
for several languages, including Portuguese (Padró and Stanilovsky 2012).
nlpnet11 is a Python library for NLP tasks based on neural networks. It provides PoStagging, semantic role labeling, and dependency parsing. Some of its functions were fine
tunning for working with Portuguese (Fonseca and Rosa 2013).
CitiusTagger12 is an open source software providing functions for PoS-tagging and
named entity recognition in the Portuguese, English, Galician, and Spanish languages
(Garcia and Gamallo 2015). For Portuguese, it was trained with European and Brazilian
Portuguese corpora.

5

http://www.cis.uni-muenc​hen.de/~schmi​d/tools​/TreeT​agger​/.
http://visl.sdu.dk/visl/pt/parsi​ng/autom​atic/.
7
http://comun​idade​.cogro​o.org/gramm​ar.
8
http://nlx.di.fc.ul.pt/tools​.html.
9
http://aeliu​s.sourc​eforg​e.net/.
10
http://nlp.lsi.upc.edu/freel​ing/.
11
https​://githu​b.com/erick​rf/nlpne​t.
12
https​://grama​tica.usc.es/pln/tools​/Citiu​sTool​s.html.
6

13

1095

A survey of sentiment analysis in the Portuguese language﻿	
Table 3  NLP tools for
Portuguese

Tool

Main functionalities

TreeTagger

Lemmatization
PoS-tagging

Palavras

Morphological analysis
PoS-tagging
Dependency parsing
Semantic parsing
Grammar checker
PoS-tagging
Sependency parsing
Morphological analysis
Lemmatization
PoS-tagging
Named entity recognition
Dependency parsing
Semantic role labeler
PoS-tagging
Morphological analysis
Named entity recognition
PoS-tagging
Word sense disambiguation
Semantic role labelling
PoS-tagging
Semantic role labeling
Dependency parsing
Lemmatization
PoS-tagging
Named entity recognition
Lemmatization
Named entity recognition
PoS-tagging
Dependency parsing
Stemming
PoS-tagging
Dependency parsing
PoS-tagging
Dependency parsing

CoGrOO
LX-Center services

Aelius
FreeLing

nlpnet
CitiusTagger
spaCy

NLTK
Stanford CoreNLP

spaCy13 is an industrial-strength NLP library that supports 49 languages, including Portuguese, and provides features such as tokenization, lemmatization, named entity recognition, PoS-tagging, dependency parsing, and syntax-driven sentence segmentation (Honnibal 2016).
NLTK14 (Natural Language Toolkit) is a Python library for NLP tasks, providing functions for tokenization, stemming, PoS-tagging, dependence parsing, semantic reasoning,
and text classification (Hardeniya et al. 2016).

13
14

https​://spacy​.io/.
http://www.nltk.org/.

13

1096

D. A. Pereira

StanfordNLP15 provides several NLP tools for the English language. For Portuguese, it
provides a machine learning model using the Bosque corpus16 for tasks such as tokenization, PoS-tagging, and dependency parsing.
Some of those tools have been compared in specific applications in literature works.
Gamallo and Garcia (2013) compared FreeLing 3.1 with TreeTagger 3.2 for the PoS-tagging function, trained with the same corpus and the same lexicon. The evaluation result
showed that FreeLing was superior, with a 2% better accuracy level.
Freitas and Vieira (2015) compared TreeTagger, FreeLing, and CitiusTagger to the PoStagging function in a dataset of the accommodation sector, applied to polarity classification
in a sentiment analysis task. They did not directly evaluate the PoS-tagging function, they
evaluated the result of the sentiment classification task after using the PoS-tagging result of
these tools. TreeTagger and FreeLing were better in some configurations, and they adopted
TreeTagger as the best in result sets.
Inácio and Caseli (2015) presented a stochastic method, implemented using NLTK,
for PoS-tagging of Brazilian Portuguese texts in the e-commerce domain. In the experiments, their implementation was trained with texts taken from e-commerce Web pages and
compared with the result of the Aelius tool, trained with the Mac-Morpho corpus. The
result showed a great advantage for the method implemented by the authors. However, it is
important to note that this implementation was trained with data from the same domain in
which it was tested, while Aelius was trained in a different domain.
Garcia et al. (2014) used FreeLing to evaluate various models for PoS-tagging different
varieties of Portuguese. The PoS tagger was trained with several combinations of Brazilian
and European corpora and tested in a Web corpora including texts from Portugal, Brazil,
Angola and Mozambique. The model trained with the European corpora obtained the best
result.

3.2 Sentiment lexicons
A sentiment lexicon is a dictionary where each word is associated with a opinion polarity (positive, negative or neutral) or a emotion (anger, fear, etc.). Lexicons are a linguistic
resource very useful in the task of sentiment polarity classification.
For the Portuguese language, four sentiment lexicons were found in the literature:
OpLexicon, Brazilian Portuguese LIWC Dictionary (LIWC-PT), SentiLex, and synsets
with polarity of Onto.PT. OpLexicon and LIWC-PT were built based on Brazilian Portuguese corpora, and SentiLex and synsets with polarities of Onto.PT were based on European Portuguese corpora. There are also two small lexicons, called Reli-Lex and LexReLi,
created from the corpus ReLi, in the domain of book reviews. The SentiStrength method
also has a lexicon for the Portuguese language.
OpLexicon17 (Souza et al. 2011) is a domain-independent lexicon, resulting from the
integration of different methods in the literature and different language resources to identify opinion-based terms. It is composed by 7.077 polarity words, among adjectives, verbs,
nouns, and expressions.

15

https​://stanf​ordnl​p.githu​b.io/stanf​ordnl​p/.
https​://stanf​ordnl​p.githu​b.io/stanf​ordnl​p/model​s.html#downl​oadin​g-and-using​-model​s.
17
https​://www.inf.pucrs​.br/linat​ural/wordp​ress/recur​sos-e-ferra​menta​s/oplex​icon/.
16

13

A survey of sentiment analysis in the Portuguese language﻿	

1097

LIWC-PT18 is a lexicon available for the Portuguese language, built from the original
English language of the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) (Pennebaker et al.
2001). The Portuguese version was created via translation, using several bilingual Portuguese-English dictionaries. Its 127,149 instances are organized into categories, and each
one can be assigned to one or more categories. Categories such as as posemo (positive
emotion) and negemo (negative emotion) can be used for opinion mining. There are also
categories for emotion mining (affect, anger, sad, etc.)
SentiLex19 is a domain-specific lexicon for social judgment, composed of 82,347
entries, organized in adjectives, nouns, verbs and idiomatic expressions (Silva et al. 2012).
Synsets with polarity of Onto.PT20 is a lexicon constructed as follows. The synsets of a
wordnet-like resource received polarities from the lemmas identified in SentiLex lexicon.
After that, using different types of semantic relations, the polarities were propagated to
other synsets. It contains 10,318 synsets with assigned polarity.
Reli-Lex21 is a lexicon created by Freitas (2013) from corpus Reli, composed of book
reviews published on the Web and previously annotated with opinion information by Freitas et al. (2014). The lexicon contains 609 entries, divided into two groups: the general
lexicon, whose polarity is highly stable, and the specific lexicon, whose assigned polarity
appears to be strongly dependent on the text domain.
LexReLi (Machado et al. 2018) is a context sensitive lexicon, created from an extended
set of the Reli corpus (Freitas et al. 2014). The lexicon is composed only by adjectives, and
their polarities were detected from a lexicon obtained from the combination of SentiLex,
LIWC-PT, and OpLexicon. LexReLi contains 1543 entries.
SentiStrength22 is a lexicon-based method for sentiment analysis at sentence level, originally created to analyze short social Web texts for the English language (Thelwall 2017).
Subsequently, it was extended to other languages, and included a lexicon for Portuguese.
Araújo et al. (2020) evaluated its performance for multilingual sentiment analysis.
Freitas and Vieira (2015) compared the lexicons LIWC-PT, OpLexicon, SentiLex and
synsets with polarities of Onto.PT applied to polarity classification in a sentiment analysis
task, in a dataset of the accommodation sector. In the experimental evaluation with various
configurations, synsets with polarities of Onto.PT presents the best results.
Filho et al. (2013) evaluated LIWC-PT for the task of sentiment analysis comparing it
with OpLexicon and SentiLex. The evaluation was done using the ReLi corpus, and the
results indicated slightly better performance for LIWC-PT.

3.3 Datasets
ReLi23 (REsenhas de LIvros) (Freitas et al. 2014) is the only complete dataset for opinion mining in the Portuguese language. It contains 1600 reviews from 13 books (by seven
authors), totalizing about 260,000 words and 12,000 sentences. The corpus was automatically annotated with word class information and manually annotated for opinion expression. In the process of annotation of opinion, were marked (1) the polarity of the phrase
18

http://www.nilc.icmc.usp.br/portl​ex/index​.php/pt/proje​tos/liwc.
http://dmir.inesc​-id.pt/proje​ct/Senti​Lex-PT_02.
20
http://ontop​t.dei.uc.pt/.
21
https​://www.lingu​ateca​.pt/Repos​itori​o/ReLi/.
22
http://senti​stren​gth.wlv.ac.uk/.
23
http://www.lingu​ateca​.pt/Repos​itori​o/ReLi/.
19

13

1098

D. A. Pereira

expressing opinion; (2) the segments that express the opinion; (3) the polarity of these
segments.
There are also other small datasets designed and used to evaluate opinion mining
experiments in specific papers. TripAdvisor24 dataset (Freitas and Vieira 2015) consists of
reviews in Portuguese of 10 hotels of TripAdvisor, manually annotated with the polarity of
some features such as location, room, service, cleanliness, among others. It contains annotations of implicit and explicit aspects. Farias et al. (2016) also provided a small restaurant
review dataset,25 labeled with aspects and their polarities.
Avanço and Nunes (2014) rated a dataset containing reviews of products crawled from
Buscapé, a online service in Brazil. It contains 1904 reviews (748 negative, 1085 positive, and 71 neutral). Vargas and Pardo (2018b) created a corpus for an empirical study on
the problem of clustering and hierarchically organizing opinion aspects in product reviews.
This corpus contains 60 smartphone and 60 camera reviews, also collected from the Buscap website, and 60 book reviews obtained from the ReLi corpus. It contains annotations
of implicit and explicit aspects, however these did not have the marked polarities. Both
datasets were not found publicly available, only the Buscapé corpus.26
Araújo et al. (2016) used a multilanguage tweets dataset.27 It contains the polarity per
sentence for a set of 510 tweets in Portuguese.
Steiner-Correa et al. (2018) presented a survey on datasets containing short messages
for the purpose of being used for multilingual sentiment analysis. Among the identified
datasets, there are four of them for the Portuguese language, collected from Twitter.
Moussallem et al. (2018) described a dataset of multilingual representation of idioms in
five languages, including Portuguese, which can be useful for sentiment analysis.

3.4 Other resources
Several other linguistic resources have been created, which are useful for sentiment analysis. Hartmann et al. (2014) created and analyzed lexical phenomena from a large corpus of
product reviews obtained from the Web, and written in Brazilian Portuguese. The lexical
resources can be downloaded and a lexical normalization tool was created.28dos Santos
et al. (2018) created a large corpus from the crawling of 808,000 distinct Brazilian blogs,
containing 7.4 million posts, which they called BlogSet-BR.29
Ontologies are also important for sentiment analysis. Concept-based sentiment analysis uses Web ontologies or semantic networks to semantically analyze review texts. They
are useful for specific domains of knowledge by representing it in a structured way and
using a common vocabulary. The OntoLP Portal of Ontologies30 publishes ontologies and
related tools and resources available in the Portuguese language. Vargas and Pardo (2018b)
made available aspects hierarchies in RDF/OWL for aspect-based opinion mining about
the smartphone, camera and book domains from Portuguese reviews.31 Chaves et al. (2012)

24

http://www.inf.pucrs​.br/linat​ural/wordp​ress/index​.php/recur​sos-e-ferra​menta​s/tripa​dviso​r/.
http://sites​.labic​.icmc.usp.br/Opini​onMet​er201​6/#datas​et.
26
https​://sites​.googl​e.com/icmc.usp.br/opina​ndo/.
27
https​://homep​ages.dcc.ufmg.br/~fabri​cio/senti​ment-langu​ages-datas​et/index​.htm.
28
http://nilc.icmc.usp.br/seman​ticnl​p/Lexic​alNor​maliz​ation​.
29
http://www.inf.pucrs​.br/linat​ural/blogs​et-br.
30
http://ontol​p.inf.pucrs​.br/index​.php.
31
https​://githu​b.com/franc​ielle​avarg​as/Aspec​t-based​-Opini​on-Minin​g.
25

13

A survey of sentiment analysis in the Portuguese language﻿	

1099

developed a multilingual ontology for the accommodation sector, called Hontology. The
languages are: English, Portuguese, Spanish and French. The result is freely available.32
Also related to concept-based sentiment analysis, SenticNet (Cambria et al. 2018) is
an initiative that has been developing a common-sense reasoning knowledge base. SenticNet is defined as a concept graph, where each concept is semantically-related to five other
concepts, has emotion categorization values attributed to four affective dimensions, and a
polarity value. SenticNet, initially proposed for the English language, has been extended
to 40 other languages, including Portuguese, and is called BabelSenticNet (Vilares et al.
2018). It is available for free as an RDF/XML file and as an API.33
Word embeddings are important word representations for sentiment analysis tasks. They
are able to capture the context of words, acting at the morphosyntactic and semantic levels.
Context is learned from large non-annotated corpora, and words are represented as vectors
of real numbers in an n-dimensional space. Hartmann et al. (2017) used a large corpus of
texts in both Brazilian and European Portuguese to train and evaluate different models of
word embeddings. The models are publicly available.34
Several language resources have been made available by research groups in the area.
Some of them are: NILC—Interinstitutional Center for Computational Linguistics,35 PUCRS NLP Group,36 Linguateca—Distributed Language Resource Center for Portuguese.37
An important project that also makes resources available is Opinando—Opinion Mining
for Portuguese.38
The most relevant conferences that publish linguistics resources for the portuguese language are: The Brazilian Symposium in Information and Human Language Technology
(STIL) and The International Conference on Computational Processing of the Portuguese
Language (PROPOR).

4 Sentiment classification
In this section, I focus on efforts related to detecting the polarity (i.e., positivity or negativity) or the emotion (i.e., joy, sadness, anger, etc.) of a given text. The task of classifying
sentiments may be formulated as follows. Let D = {d1 , d2 , … , dk } be a set of documents
(reviews, sentences, aspects). Each document di has a list of features, such as terms presence and frequency, PoS-tagging, opinion words, and negations. Let C = {c1 , c2 , … , cl } be
a set of L classes, with their respective labels; in this case, a set of polarities or emotions.
The objective is to produce a classification function, which maps each document di into one
of the predefined classes of the set C.
Figure 1 presents the main sentiment classification techniques. They can be divided
into machine learning, lexicon based, and concept based approaches. Hybrid approaches
combining these techniques are also very common. Machine learning approaches
extract linguistic features from texts for use in traditional machine learning algorithms.

32

http://ontol​p.inf.pucrs​.br/Recur​sos/downl​oads-Honto​logy.php.
https​://senti​c.net/.
34
http://nilc.icmc.usp.br/embed​dings​.
35
http://nilc.icmc.usp.br/.
36
http://www.inf.pucrs​.br/linat​ural/wordp​ress/.
37
https​://www.lingu​ateca​.pt/.
38
https​://sites​.googl​e.com/icmc.usp.br/opina​ndo/.
33

13

1100

D. A. Pereira

Lexicon-based approaches obtain the degree of polarity of opinion or emotion from a sentiment lexicon. Concept-based approaches use concept networks to accomplish semantic text
analysis.
Machine learning algorithms learn patterns from data, and use those patterns to make
predictions about new data. The learning technique can be supervised or unsupervised.
Supervised learning needs labeled data for training. Unsupervised learning, on the other
hand, does not need it, so such technique is used when labeled data is not available or it is
difficult to find it.
In the lexicon-based approach, classification is done by searching the text words in a
sentiment lexicon. The score of the words found is used to predict the polarity of the input
text. There are different ways of processing these scores, such as summing up and taking the average. The creation of lexicons can be done by a dictionary-based or a corpusbased approach. In both, the creation process uses a set of opinion seed words to search for
other words in a dictionary or in a large corpus. In the case of the dictionary, new words
are found through synonyms or antonyms, and in the case of the corpus, they are found
through context-specific orientations.
The concept-based approach uses Web ontologies or semantic networks to semantically
analyze texts, trying to capture concepts instead of single words. Such concepts, sometimes
composed of multi-word expressions, can be implicitly associated with emotion.
Several papers have developed methods for classifying sentiments for the Portuguese
language using any of the approaches described, or combinations of them. With respect to
supervised approaches, Carvalho et al. (2017) compared the performance of Naive Bayes,
SVM and Maximum Entropy classifiers using three feature selection methods for the sentiment prediction task in a collection of election-related news in Brazil. Grandin and Coello
(2016) presented a system, called Piegas, that ranks the sentiment of tweets written in Portuguese about a topic of interest. Classification is made by a supervised method based on
Naive Bayes. Brum et al. (2016) compared sentiment classifier models on a skewed class
corpus. They under-sampled and over-sampled the target corpora, and the compared models obtained mixed results.
Some works used deep neural networks for sentiment classification. da Silva et al.
(2018) evaluated a convolutional neural network with character-level embeddings for sentiment classification of product reviews in Brazilian Portuguese texts. Wehrmann et al.
(2017) also proposed a convolutional neural network with character-level embeddings for
sentiment classification of tweets, which may be written in more than one language. The
method is translation-free, and was evaluated in a tweet corpora for four languages, including Portuguese. Cunha et al. (2019) proposed a sentiment classification model using a deep
neural network to classify YouTube video comments. de Souza et al. (2018) presented a
convolutional neural network approach for sentiment classification of hotel’s reviews written in Brazilian Portuguese.
Using an unsupervised approach, Martins et al. (2015) developed a sentiment classification technique based on a combination of methods adapted from English to Portuguese,
returning the best result from the set of methods. The developed method is compared with
a supervised machine learning method, and presented better results than the baseline when
the amount of training data is small. It also was better than individual methods for a real
Web dataset of financial market news in Portuguese.
Regarding lexicon-based approaches, Souza and Vieira (2012) evaluated different sentiment lexicons for sentiment classification of tweets written in Portuguese. They also
applied different models of negation, and evaluated the effect of preprocessing techniques.
They used the lexicons SentiLex and OpLexicon, and obtain better results with OpLexicon.

13

A survey of sentiment analysis in the Portuguese language﻿	

1101

Fig. 1  Sentiment classification techniques

Tumitan and Becker (2013) described a study to rate news comments involving politics.
To classify the polarity of sentiments, the authors used a lexicon-based approach by adding
Brazilian and domain-specific terms to SentiLex, which natively has European Portuguese
terms. The sentence level classification was obtained by summing the polarities of the sentiment words identified in the lexicon. They had problems with typographical errors, causing lexicon not to recognize sentiment words. To lessen the effects of this kind of error,
they disregard the accentuation of words.
Avanço and Nunes (2014) developed lexicon-based sentiment classifiers for reviews of
products written in Brazilian Portuguese. They evaluated the results by using three different sentiment lexicons (OpLexicon, SentiLex, LIWC-PT) combined with simple strategies.
The best results were obtained with the implementation of the classifier that used lexicon
SentiLex and handled intensifiers and negation.
Using a hybrid approach, Souza et al. (2016a) proposed a supervised method combining lexicon-based and rule-based approaches for sentiment classification. The results were
evaluated in a collection of tweets containing costumer’s opinion about products and services from Brazilian companies.
For emotion classification, Maia and Leal (2017) described the generation of the EmoSpell, a dictionary of words with their emotional value. They also developed a Web application and a Web service that allows users to access the dictionary. The approach was evaluated in a dataset of student texts containing emotions.

13

13

Supervised approaches using Recursive Neural Tensor Network,
Doc2Vec and Naive Bayes
Supervised approach using a convolutional neural network

Supervised approach using a convolutional neural network

Supervised approach using a convolutional neural network
Supervised approach using a convolutional neural network

Unsupervised approach based on a combination of existing methods

Lexicon-based approach using SentiLex and OpLexicon

Brum et al. (2016)

da Silva et al. (2018)

Wehrmann et al. (2017)

Cunha et al. (2019)
de Souza et al. (2018)

Martins et al. (2015)

Souza and Vieira (2012)

Lexicon-based approach using OpLexicon, SentiLex and LIWC-PT

Hybrid - supervised method combining lexicon-based and rule-based
approaches
Approach based on a dictionary of emotions

Translation-based approach

Avanço and Nunes (2014)

Souza et al. (2016a)

Maia and Leal (2017)

Araújo et al. (2016)

Tumitan and Becker (2013) Lexicon-based approach using SentiLex

Supervised approach using Naive Bayes

Grandin and Coello (2016)

Complete application with user interface to process Twitter messages.
Use bigrams for terms of negation. Simple classification method
Evaluate a skewed class corpus comparing models. Use under-sampling
and over-sampling techniques for balancing between classes
Reproduction of a existing method. Character level representation.
Construction of a review product dataset
Character level representation. Cross-language translation-free method.
Evaluated in tweet corpora
Word embeddings representation. Analyze YouTube video comments
Word embeddings representation. Analyze hotel’s reviews. Compare
with other models applied on the same corpus
Better than individual methods. Not better than a Naive-Bayes Multinomial method
Evaluate different lexicons, models of negation, and pre-processing
techniques. Better results obtained with OpLexicon
Brazilian and domain-specific terms added to SentiLex. Problems with
typographic errors and idioms
Simple strategies combined with lexicons. Better results obtained with
SentiLex
Produce a corpus of tweets written in Brazilian Portuguese language
about products and services
Describe the generation of the EmoSpell dictionary. Develop an application exploiting the dictionary
Prediction using English methods on translated datasets. Get good
results despite the translation problems

Supervised approach using Naive Bayes, SVM and Maximum Entropy Compare performance of methods. Feature vector composed by both
classifiers and three feature selection methods
unigrams and bigram obtains the best results

Carvalho et al. (2017)

Remarks

Classification techniques

Paper

Table 4  Summary of approaches for sentiment classification

1102
D. A. Pereira

Classification techniques

Translation-based approach

Paper

Cirqueira et al. (2017)

Table 4  (continued)

Prediction using English methods on translated datasets. Get good
results despite the translation problems

Remarks

A survey of sentiment analysis in the Portuguese language﻿	
1103

13

1104

D. A. Pereira

No paper was found in literature dealing with concept-based approaches for sentiment
classification in the Portuguese language. A research has used conceptual approach for
aspect-based sentiment analysis, as I describe in Sect. 5.
Most research on sentiment analysis focuses on the English language, and most existing
strategies for other languages consist of adaptations of existing lexical resources. Given
this, Araújo et al. (2016) evaluated how translating non-English languages datasets into
English using the Google machine translation system can affect the performance of English
sentiment classification methods. Twenty-one sentence-level sentiment classification methods proposed for English are evaluated in nine specific language datasets, including Portuguese. Also, the results were compared with two language-specific methods. The results
showed that translation is a competitive strategy, even losing in performance compared to
original English texts.
Cirqueira et al. (2017) also evaluated the performance of methods and linguistic
resources for sentiment classification in English and Portuguese. Datasets written in Portuguese were used in algorithms developed specifically for the Portuguese language, and
then these data were translated into English and used in equivalent algorithms developed
for the English language. The results of the English methods were better than those of their
corresponding Portuguese versions, even with poor performance of translation tools.
Table 4 summarizes the approaches discussed above for sentiment classification.

5 Aspect‑based sentiment analysis
In this section, I focus on research related to aspect-based sentiment analysis. At this level
of granularity, the goal is to classify sentiment in relation to specific characteristics, attributes, or components of an entity, which are called aspects. For example, in the sentence “I
loved the story, the characters and all the wealth of details”, taken from reviews of a book,
we can identify the aspects “story”, “characters”, and “wealth of details”.
Aspects may be explicit or implicit in the text. Explicit aspects are those in which terms
(words) are found directly in the sentence. For example, the “story”, “characters”, and
“wealth of details” aspects of the previous example sentence. Implicit aspects are those in
which terms are not explicit in the sentence, however can be inferred from the expressions
of sentiment. For example, in the sentence “The phone is too expensive”, we can identify
the aspect “price”, inferred from the expression “too expensive”.
Aspect-based sentiment analysis is comprised of the following four main tasks: (1) identification and extraction of aspects, (2) grouping of terms referring to the same aspect, (3)
classification of sentiment expressed on each aspect, and (4) creation of a summary with
the generated aspects. Figure 2 illustrates an example of the aspect-based sentiment analysis tasks.
The following sections detail each of these tasks and their main related work.

5.1 Aspect identification and extraction
The first task aims to identify and extract the terms that represent the aspects in each input
document. It is considered a key task because errors in this step can trigger failures in
the following steps. The main approaches to the task of identifying and extracting explicit
aspects are based on language rules, sequence models, topic models, and concept-based.

13

A survey of sentiment analysis in the Portuguese language﻿	

1105

Language rule-based approaches aims to identify contextual patterns that capture the
properties of terms and their relationships. They typically use the results of applying
NLP tools, such as PoS-tagging, dependency parser, and named entity recognition. The
approaches are usually unsupervised and domain independent.
With language rule-based approaches, we can explore issues specific to the Portuguese
language. For example, we can heuristically enumerate a set of rules with grammatical
patterns that identify potential aspects and expressions of sentiment (one or more words),
simultaneously identifying how users describe aspects and their sentiment.
Sequence model-based approaches model the identification and extraction of aspects as
a task of sequence labeling, because aspects and sentiment expressions usually appear in
sequence in a sentence. The main techniques used are the Hidden Markov Model (HMM)
and the Conditional Random Fields (CRF), which are supervised and iterative probabilistic models. They can use the results of grammar classifiers and dependency parsers as
features.
Topic modeling-based approaches consider the probabilistic distribution of words contained in documents as topics, and each document can contain multiple topics. Each topic
groups different words expressing the same concept, and it is then considered an aspect. In
this case, the task of grouping different terms referring to the same aspect is naturally performed together with the aspect identification task. The main techniques used are Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis (pLSA) and Latent Direchlet Allocation (LDA), which are
unsupervised techniques.
Conceptual approaches uses Web ontologies or semantic networks to semantically analyze texts, capturing concepts to identify and extract aspects.
For the identification and extraction of implicit aspects, the main approaches draw a correlation between implicit aspects and their explicit aspects through the words of sentiment
commonly used to refer to explicit aspects. The main techniques are: clustering exploring
the co-occurrence between a sentiment word and an explicit aspect, association rules, also
exploring word co-occurrence, and classification techniques exploring lexical word relationships using a dictionary-based method.
These are the main approaches found in the literature related to the English language.
For Portuguese, the works explore part of these approaches, focusing on those based on
language rules. For the task of identifying and extracting explicit aspects, there are two
categories of work: those that identify the set of most frequent aspects given a set of input
documents, without identifying where they occur in the text, and those works that identify
the aspects and their explicit occurrences in each excerpt of each input document. In the
latter case, some works also identify and extract the expressions of sentiment related to
each aspect. Most works for the Portuguese language are in the first category, and use the
language rule approach, with the word embeddings technique to identify aspects, which are
usually nouns or noun phrases.
Machado et al. (2017b) presented frequency-based and vector-based word representation (Word2Vec) methods for identifying terms of aspects in Portuguese microblogs about
Dengue, Chikungunya, Zika and Microcephaly. The frequency-based method simply
returns the most common nouns (without repetition). This method was extended with a
pruning step using Word2Vec, which aims to remove terms that, even having relatively
high frequencies in the analyzed texts, have no relation to the studied context. The method
was applied to identify simple terms (unigrams) and compounds (bigrams and trigrams).
For the grammatical classification (PoS-tagging) of the text, they used the NLTK toolkit,
trained in the Floresta Sintática corpus. The experiments showed that there were a significant improvement in the quality of the results after the pruning step using Word2Vec.

13

1106

D. A. Pereira

Fig. 2  Aspect-based sentiment analysis tasks

Machado et al. (2017a) analyzed three unsupervised approaches to identifying aspect
terms in Portuguese, focusing on book reviews. A frequency-based method was used as
baseline. Another approach was the Hu and Liu hybrid method (Hu and Liu 2004). They
also used a Word2Vec approach to improve the Hu and Liu method in order to process
infrequent terms. They showed that the evaluated methods have varied performances, however the results were improved when considering the distributional properties of the words
by using Word2Vec.
Catharin and Feltrim (2018) implemented three language rule-based approaches to
extracting explicit aspects. The approaches are based on centering, pattern matching, and

13

A survey of sentiment analysis in the Portuguese language﻿	

1107

heuristics, and they are evaluated in the domains of political news and books. The centering approach evaluates coherence in discourse by analyzing transitions among centers
of attention, considering the center as the aspect. Pattern matching approach is based on
morphosyntactic patterns by using PoS tags. The heuristics approach uses the subject of a
sentence or proper names as the aspect.
Saias et al. (2018) presented an approach for extracting aspects and classifying their
polarities in short texts in Portuguese. The aspect extraction approach is based on language
rules. Aspect candidates are expressions that have relationships with the entity and possibly with terms of sentiment. The sentiment polarity of aspects is predicted by a Maximum
Entropy classifier.
Farias et al. (2016) implemented and provided a framework, called Opinion-meter, for
extracting and classifying aspect sentiments for four languages, including Portuguese. They
implemented known English language methods, and used automatic translation of the original language datasets into English. Experiments showed that with translation, the results
were better than applying adapted methods, using PoS-tagger and lexicon, to Portuguese.
Aires et al. (2018) presented a set of approaches using deep learning for identifying
and classifying aspects. The proposal is composed of two architectures each containing
two modules. The first architecture uses a document level model, and the second trains a
model for each aspect. In the experimental evaluation, the second architecture achieved the
highest accuracy, however, it needs more data to train specific aspects. The proposal has
the disadvantage of making use of a fixed list of aspects, being unable to discover aspects
dynamically.
The work of Freitas and Vieira (2013) took a concept-based approach to the task of
identifying and extracting explicit aspects. The proposed method identifies aspects in a set
of reviews by using an ontology, identifies the polarity associated with each aspect by using
a lexicon sentiment, and generates tuples aspect-polarity as output. Experiments were conducted on movie (Movie Ontology) and hotel (Hontology) ontologies. Sentiment lexicon
OpLexicon and PoS-tagger TreeTagger were also used.

5.2 Aspect grouping
The task of grouping terms referring to the same aspect is basically a data disambiguation
task, and it is important to use a good measure of semantic similarity. Product reviewers often use different words to refer to the same aspect. For example, “photo”, “image”
and “picture” refer to the same aspect of a digital camera, and they should be grouped as
single-aspect terms. The main approaches used for aspect grouping are: topic models, clustering, dictionaries, and thesauri. Since synonyms are domain dependent, dictionaries and
thesauri are usually combined with some other technique.
Vargas and Pardo (2018a) presented an approach to group aspects, dealing with both
implicit and explicit aspects. Their method, called OpCluster-PT, is based on a mix of linguistic knowledge to cluster aspects. Through an empirical study of product review data,
they inserted into their clustering algorithm the use of various lexical relationships such as
is-a, part-of, and synonymy, as well as other relationships such as diminutive/augmentative
and foreignism. These relationships were obtained through the use of various linguistic
resources available for the Portuguese language. In the experimental evaluation, OpCluster-PT significantly outperformed the baseline methods.
The same authors, in Vargas and Pardo (2018b), presented a study about aspects contained in a corpus of product reviews aiming to understand the linguistic characteristics

13

1108

D. A. Pereira

used to semantically recognize, hierarchically organize, and cluster aspects. They manually produced reference data, which can be used for evaluation of new methods on aspect
grouping in future researches.

5.3 Aspect sentiment classification
The task of classifying sentiment expressed on each aspect involves identifying the aspectrelated sentiment expression and using one of the approaches described in Sect. 4 to identify aspect-related polarity or emotion. In some works, such as Aires et al. (2018), Farias
et al. (2016), Freitas and Vieira (2013), and Saias et al. (2018), sentiment expressions are
identified and classified along with the task of identifying and extracting aspects.
Freitas and Vieira (2015) presented a study on opinion mining comparing PoS-taggers
and sentiment lexicons for the Portuguese language. For polarity classification, they also
evaluated the impact of a few linguistic rules. Polarity is attributed to a set of explicit predefined aspects for accommodations, obtained from TripAdvisor. Therefore, this work does
not apply any specific approach for identifying and extracting aspects, it only classifies predefined aspects.

5.4 Aspect summarization
The task of aspect summarization consists of creating a summary for the set of opinions
on each identified aspect. It is important for a final visualization of a large volume of opinions. Several summary presentation strategies can be used. For example, we can show for
each aspect group a final score or 1 to 5 star style rating, along with some instances of the
phrases containing the aspect and the sentiment expression.
Condori and Pardo (2017) presented a comparative study of four summarization methods. The authors also developed two new methods based on the main advantages of the
compared methods, which produced results that outperform some of the literature methods. Summaries can be produced by extractive or abstractive approaches. Both approaches
are contemplated in both comparative and proposed methods. In addition, methods can
produce structured and unstructured summaries. For the extractive method developed, the
summary is produced by a new content selection strategy, and for the abstractive method, it
is produced by a novel Natural Language Generation template-based system.
Anchiêta et al. (2017) enriched the extractive opinion summarization method proposed
by Condori and Pardo (2017), incorporating a fuzzy inference system to assess the importance of the sentences that will compose the summary.
Table 5 summarizes the approaches discussed above for aspect-based sentiment
analysis.

6 Open challenges
Some studies (Araújo et al. 2020; Cirqueira et al. 2017; Farias et al. 2016) show that methods developed for English and applied in datasets with texts translated into English perform
better than their versions in Portuguese. This indicates the need for new specific proposals
for the Portuguese language, as the translation process can lead to loss of information from
one language to another.

13

IE

IE

Machado et al. (2017b)

Machado et al. (2017a)

IE SC

IE SC

IE SC

SC

GR

GR

SU

SU

Farias et al. (2016)

Aires et al. (2018)

Freitas and Vieira (2013)

Freitas and Vieira (2015)

Vargas and Pardo (2018a)

Vargas and Pardo (2018b)

Condori and Pardo (2017)

Anchiêta et al. (2017)

Linguistic approach with a fuzzy inference system

Linguistic approaches

Clustering and linguistic approaches

Lexicon-based approach using OpLexicon, SentiLex and LIWCPT, and synsets with polarities of Onto.PT
Clustering and linguistic approaches

Language rule approaches based on centering, pattern matching,
and heuristics
Language rule approach for IE, and Maximum Entropy classifier
for SC
Language rule approach for IE, and PMI, Lexicon and Naive
Bayes for SC
SVM, Recurrent Neural Networks, and Convolutional Neural
Networks
Concept-based approach for IE and lexicon-based for SC

Language rule approach with word embeddings

Language rule approach with word embeddings

Techniques

Processing infrequent terms using Word2Vec improves results of
existing methods
Methods obtain low performance, especially on ReLi corpus, which
has low proportion of targets per sentence
Extract aspects and sentiment expressions simultaneously, and classify sentiments. A more specific evaluation for IE is missing
Extraction and classification using English methods on translated
datasets. Simple methods
Need to train a model for each aspect. Unable to discover aspects
dynamically
Extract aspects and sentiment expressions simultaneously, and classify sentiments. Language rules need to be improved
Compare PoS-taggers and lexicons. Evaluate impact of linguistic
rules. Classify predefined aspects
Deal with both implicit and explicit aspects. Use various linguistic
resources
Present challenges for clustering and hierarchically organizing opinion aspects. Produce reference data for aspect grouping
Compare summarization methods. Produce summaries by extractive
or abstractive approaches. Produce structured or unstructured
summaries
Enrich the method proposed by Condori and Pardo (2017). Evaluated on a very small corpus

Pruning using Word2Vec improves results of a frequency-based
method. Identify simple and compounds terms

Remarks

Task column: IE—aspect identification and extraction, GR—aspect grouping, SC—aspect sentiment classification, SU—aspect summarization

IE SC

Saias et al. (2018)

Catharin and Feltrim (2018) IE

Task

Paper

Table 5  Summary of approaches for aspect-based sentiment analysis

A survey of sentiment analysis in the Portuguese language﻿	
1109

13

1110

D. A. Pereira

Language resources are essential for the development of more effective methods. One
of the challenges is to address the lack of large and robust language resources to support
sentiment analysis for the Portuguese language. Although there are already good NLP tools
and comprehensive corpora of written language, resources for specific domains are still
needed, and wordnet-like resources are still very limited. It is also important the creation of
more common-sense knowledge bases for concept-based sentiment analysis.
The user-generated content from online social networks does not follow formal grammar rules, which imposes challenges for preprocessing tasks. Such tasks are important,
for example, for misspelling correction, abbreviation expansion, emoticons polarity identification, and PoS-tagging. Tools for such tasks need to be improved to the Portuguese
language. Cirqueira et al. (2018) presented a systematic literature review on preprocessing approaches to Portuguese texts for sentiment analysis. They identified a diversity of
approaches, and concluded that there is no complete proposals or tools for preprocessing
social media data for Portuguese.
Some supporting resources are being built. For the identification of irony, for example,
Moraes et al. (2017) presented a study on a specific collection of tweets and produced an
annotated corpus involving this linguistic phenomenon. However, much remains to be done
for research involving this topic.
Another challenge is to address the linguistic differences of the Portuguese language,
such as those that occur between the Brazilian and European variants. In this sense, Vitório
et al. (2017)’s work presented a study showing the effects on the performance of opinion
mining applications in relation to these linguistic differences.
No studies were found involving comparative sentiment analysis. Methods for this type
of analysis may be dependent on idiomatic expressions, so a survey of them for the Portuguese language would be helpful. No papers on multimodal sentiment analysis (Poria et al.
2016) were also found. Only one work involving emotion classification was found (Maia
and Leal 2017). However, supporting resources are already being built. Rodrigues et al.
(2017) presented a study on grammatical categories that may be useful to indicate emotion.

7 Conclusions
This paper presented an overview of research on sentiment analysis for the Portuguese
language, reviewed the state of the art, and discussed challenges related to the field. The
papers involving approaches for each of the tasks of sentiment analysis, as well as the supporting linguistic resources, were presented and categorized. Much effort has been made in
recent years and new approaches and methods have emerged. Nevertheless, often translating texts into English and using tools developed for that language may still be more effective than specific efforts in Portuguese. This opens up a range of opportunities for further developing of research exploring language specificities, as well as for proposals for
language-independent solutions. The latter are able to classify sentiments from an entry
containing data from multiple languages without having to translate them into a specific
language (Shakeel et al. 2019; Wehrmann et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2017).
Acknowledgements I thank the anonymous reviewers for their comments, which greatly improved the final
version of the article. This work was partially supported by the Brazilian National Council for Scientific and
Technological Development (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico—CNPq)
and the Minas Gerais Research Support Foundation (Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de Minas
Gerais—FAPEMIG).

13

A survey of sentiment analysis in the Portuguese language﻿	

1111

References
Aires JP, Padilha C, Quevedo C, Meneguzzi F (2018) A deep learning approach to classify aspect-level
sentiment using small datasets. In: Proceedings of the international joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, pp 1–8. https​://doi.org/10.1109/IJCNN​.2018.84897​60
Anchiêta RT, de Sousa RF, Moura RS, Pardo TAS (2017) Improving opinion summarization by assessing sentence importance in on-line reviews. In: Proceedings of symposium in information and
human language technology, SBC, Uberlândia, Brazil, pp 32–36
Araújo M, Reis J, Pereira A, Benevenuto F (2016) An evaluation of machine translation for multilingual
sentence-level sentiment analysis. In: Proceedings of 31st ACM symposium on applied computing
(SAC)
Araújo M, Pereira A, Benevenuto F (2020) A comparative study of machine translation for multilingual
sentence-level sentiment analysis. Inf Sci 512:1078–1102. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2019.10.031
Avanço LV, Nunes MdGV (2014) Lexicon-based sentiment analysis for reviews of products in brazilian
portuguese. In: Proceedings of the Brazilian conference on intelligent systems (BRACIS), IEEE
computer society, pp 277–281. https​://doi.org/10.1109/BRACI​S.2014.57
Balahur A, Turchi M (2013) Improving sentiment analysis in twitter using multilingual machine translated data. In: Proceedings of recent advances in natural language processing, pp 49–55
Bick E (2000) The parsing system palavras. Automatic grammatical analysis of portuguese in a constraint grammar framework. Aarhus University Press, Ph.D. dissertation
Branco A, Costa F, Ferreira E, Martins P, Nunes F, Silva J, Silveira S (2009) LX-Center: a center of
online linguistic services. In: Proceedings of the 47th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (ACL) and the 4th international joint conference on natural language processing
of the AFNLP—software demonstrations, association for computational linguistics, Suntec, Singapore, pp 5–8. https​://www.aclwe​b.org/antho​logy/P09-4002
Brum H, Araujo F, Kepler F (2016) Sentiment analysis for Brazilian Portuguese over a skewed class
corpora. In: Proceedings of the 12th international conference on computational processing of the
Portuguese language (PROPOR). Springer, Tomar, Portugal, pp 134–138
Cambria E (2016) Affective computing and sentiment analysis. IEEE Intell Syst 31(2):102–107. https​://
doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2016.31
Cambria E, Schuller B, Xia Y, Havasi C (2013) New avenues in opinion mining and sentiment analysis.
IEEE Intell Syst 28(2):15–21. https​://doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2013.30
Cambria E, Poria S, Hazarika D, Kwok K (2018) Senticnet 5: discovering conceptual primitives for
sentiment analysis by means of context embeddings. In: Proceedings of the the thirty-second AAAI
conference on artificial intelligence (AAAI). AAAI Press, New Orleans, USA, pp 1795–1802
Carvalho CMA, Nagano H, Barros AK (2017) A comparative study for sentiment analysis on election
Brazilian news. In: Proceedings of the 11th Brazilian symposium in information and human language technology (STIL), pp 103–111. https​://aclan​tholo​gy.info/paper​s/W17-6613/w17-6613
Catharin LG, Feltrim VD (2018) Finding opinion targets in news comments and book reviews. In: Proceedings of the 13th international conference on computational processing of the Portuguese language (PROPOR). Springer, Canela, Brazil, pp 375–384
Chaturvedi I, Cambria E, Welsch RE, Herrera F (2018) Distinguishing between facts and opinions for
sentiment analysis: survey and challenges. Inf Fusion 44:65–77. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffu​
s.2017.12.006
Chaves MS, de Freitas LA, Vieira R (2012) Hontology: a multilingual ontology for the accommodation
sector in the tourism industry. In: Proceedings of the international conference on knowledge engineering and ontology development (KEOD), SciTePress, pp 149–154
Chen Z, Shen S, Hu Z, Lu X, Mei Q, Liu X (2019) Emoji-powered representation learning for crosslingual sentiment classification. In: The world wide web conference, association for computing
machinery, New York, NY, USA, pp 251–262. https​://doi.org/10.1145/33085​58.33136​00
Cirqueira D, Jr AJ, Lobato F, de Santana AL, Pinheiro M (2017) Performance evaluation of sentiment
analysis methods for Brazilian Portuguese. In: Business information systems workshops. Springer,
pp 245–251. https​://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-52464​-1_22
Cirqueira D, Pinheiro MF, Jacob A, Lobato F, Ádamo Santana (2018) A literature review in preprocessing for sentiment analysis for Brazilian Portuguese social media. In: Proceedings of IEEE/WIC/
ACM international conference on web intelligence (WI), pp 746–749. https​://doi.org/10.1109/
WI.2018.00008​
Condori REL, Pardo TAS (2017) Opinion summarization methods: comparing and extending extractive and abstractive approaches. Expert Syst Appl 78:124–134. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
eswa.2017.02.006

13

1112

D. A. Pereira

Cunha AAL, Costa MC, Pacheco MAC (2019) Sentiment analysis of youtube video comments using
deep neural networks. In: International conference on artificial intelligence and soft computing
(ICAISC). Springer, Cham, pp 561–570
da Silva RP, Santos FAO, do Nascimento FB, Macedo HT (2018) Cross-language approach for sentiment
classification in Brazilian Portuguese with convnets. In: Latifi S (ed) Information technology—new
generations. Springer, Cham, pp 311–316
da Silva Conrado M, Felippo AD, Pardo TAS, Rezende SO (2014) A survey of automatic term extraction
for Brazilian Portuguese. J Braz Comput Soc. https​://doi.org/10.1186/1678-4804-20-12
Dashtipour K, Poria S, Hussain A, Cambria E, Hawalah AYA, Gelbukh A, Zhou Q (2016) Multilingual
sentiment analysis: state of the art and independent comparison of techniques. Cogn Comput. https​
://doi.org/10.1007/s1255​9-016-9415-7
de Alencar LF (2010) Aelius: uma ferramenta para anotao automtica de corpora usando o nltk. In: IX
Encontro de Lingustica de Corpus. Porto Alegre, Brasil, pp 1–8
de Souza JGR, de Paiva Oliveira A, de Andrade GC, Moreira A (2018) A deep learning approach for
sentiment analysis applied to hotel’s reviews. In: Proceedings of the international conference on
applications of natural language to information systems. Springer, pp 48–56
Dong Y, Fu Y, Wang L, Chen Y, Dong Y, Li J (2020) A sentiment analysis method of capsule network
based on BiLSTM. IEEE Access 8:37014–37020. https​://doi.org/10.1109/ACCES​S.2020.29737​11
dos Santos HDP, Woloszyn V, Vieira R (2018) BlogSet-BR: a Brazilian Portuguese blog corpus. In:
Proceedings of the eleventh international conference on language resources and evaluation (LREC),
Miyazaki, Japan, pp 661–664
Farias DS, Matsuno IP, Marcacini RM, Rezende SO (2016) Opinion-meter: a framework for aspectbased sentiment analysis. In: Proceedings of the 22nd Brazilian symposium on multimedia and the
web (Webmedia). ACM, Teresina, Brazil, pp 351–354. https​://doi.org/10.1145/29767​96.29882​14
Ferreira RS, Pereira DA (2019) BigFeel—a distributed processing environment for the integration of
sentiment analysis methods. Comput J. https​://doi.org/10.1093/comjn​l/bxz02​0
Filho PPB, Pardo TAS, Aluísio SM (2013) An evaluation of the Brazilian Portuguese LIWC dictionary
for sentiment analysis. In: Proceedings of the 9th Brazilian symposium in information and human
language technology, Fortaleza, Brazil, pp 215–219
Fonseca ER, Rosa JaLG (2013) A two-step convolutional neural network approach for semantic role
labeling. In: Proceedings of the international joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN). IEEE,
Dallas, TX, USA, https​://doi.org/10.1109/IJCNN​.2013.67071​18; https​://ieeex​plore​.ieee.org/docum​
ent/67071​18
Freitas C (2013) Sobre a construção de um léxico da afetividade para o processamento computacional do
português. Revista Brasileira de Linguística Aplicada 13:1031–1059
Freitas LA, Vieira R (2013) Ontology based feature level opinion mining for Portuguese reviews. In:
Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on world wide web. ACM, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
WWW ’13 Companion, pp 367–370. https​://doi.org/10.1145/24877​88.24879​44
Freitas L, Vieira R (2015) Exploring resources for sentiment analysis in Portuguese language. In: Proceedings of the Brazilian conference on intelligent systems (BRACIS). IEEE, Natal, Brazil, pp
152–156. https​://doi.org/10.1109/BRACI​S.2015.52
Freitas C, Motta E, Milidiú R, César J (2014) Sparkling vampire... lol! annotating opinions in a book
review corpus. In: Aluísio Sandra, Tagnin Stella E O (eds) New language technologies and linguistic research: a two-way Road. Cambridge Scholars Publishing, Cambridge, pp 128–146
Gamallo P, Garcia M (2013) Freeling e treetagger: um estudo comparativo no âmbito do português.
Technical report, Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Portugal
Garcia M, Gamallo P (2015) Yet another suite of multilingual NLP tools. In: Proceedings of the 4th
international symposium on languages, applications and technologies (SLATE), Madrid, Spain, pp
65–75. https​://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-27653​-3_7
Garcia M, Gamallo P, Gayo I, Cruz M (2014) Pos-tagging the web in portuguese. National varieties, text
typologies and spelling systems. Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural 53:95–101
Ghorbel H, Jacot D (2011) Sentiment analysis of French movie reviews. Springer, Berlin, pp 97–108.
https​://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-21384​-7_7
Grandin PH, Coello JMA (2016) Piegas: a systems for sentiment analysis of tweets in Portuguese. IEEE
Latin Am Trans 14(7):3467–3473. https​://doi.org/10.1109/TLA.2016.75876​56
Hardeniya N, Perkins J, Chopra D, Joshi N, Mathur I (2016) Natural language processing: python and
NLTK. Packt Publishing Ltd, Birmingham
Harris M, Vincent N (2003) The romance languages. Routledge, Abingdon

13

A survey of sentiment analysis in the Portuguese language﻿	

1113

Hartmann NS, Avanço LV, Balage PP, Duran MS, Nunes MdGV, Pardo TAS, Aluisio SM (2014) A large
corpus of product reviews in portuguese: tackling out-of-vocabulary words. In: Proceedings of the
international conference on language resources and evaluation (LREC), ELRA, pp 3865–3871
Hartmann NS, Fonseca ER, Shulby CD, Treviso MV, Rodrigues JS, Aluísio SM (2017) Portuguese word
embeddings: evaluating on word analogies and natural language tasks. In: Proceedings of symposium in information and human language technology, SBC, Uberlândia, Brazil, pp 122–131
Hinton GE, Sabour S, Frosst N (2018) Matrix capsules with EM routing. In: Proceedings of the 6th
international conference on learning representations. https​://openr​eview​.net/forum​?id=HJWLf​
GWRb
Honnibal M (2016) Introducing spaCy. https​://explo​sion.ai/blog/intro​ducin​g-spacy​. Accessed May 2019
Hu M, Liu B (2004) Mining opinion features in customer reviews. In: Proceedings of the 19th national
conference on artificial intelligence (AAAI). AAAI Press, pp 755–760. http://dl.acm.org/citat​ion.
cfm?id=15971​48.15972​69
Inácio ML, Caseli HM (2015) Etiquetação morfossintática de textos em português do Brasil no domínio
do e-commerce. In: Anais do IV student workshop on information and human language technology,
pp 1–6. http://www.lbd.dcc.ufmg.br/colec​oes/tilic​/2015/008.pdf
Joshi A, Bhattacharyya P, Carman MJ (2017) Automatic sarcasm detection: a survey. ACM Comput
Surv 50(5):73:1–73:22. https​://doi.org/10.1145/31244​20
Kinoshita J, Salvador LN, Menezes CED, Silva W (2007) CoGrOO—an openoffice grammar checker. In:
Proceedings of the seventh international conference on intelligent systems design and applications
(ISDA). IEEE, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, pp 525–530. https​://doi.org/10.1109/ISDA.2007.145
Lo SL, Cambria E, Chiong R, Cornforth D (2017) Multilingual sentiment analysis: from formal to informal and scarce resource languages. Artif Intell Rev 48(4):499–527. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1046​
2-016-9508-4
Machado MT, Pardo TAS, Ruiz EES (2017a) Analysis of unsupervised aspect term identification methods for Portuguese reviews. In: Anais do XIV Encontro Nacional de Inteligncia Artificial e Computacional (ENIAC), SBC, pp 239–249
Machado MT, Temporal JCAN, Pardo TAS, Ruiz EES (2017b) Mineração de tópicos e aspectos em
microblogs sobre dengue, chikungunya, zika e microcefalia. In: Anais do Congresso da Sociedade
Brasileira de Computação (CSBC), Sociedade Brasileira de Computação
Machado M, A S Pardo T, Ruiz E (2018) Creating a Portuguese context sensitive lexicon for sentiment
analysis. In: Proceedings of the 13th international conference on computational processing of the
Portuguese language (PROPOR), Canela, Brazil, pp 335–344. https​://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-31999722​-3_34
Maia MI, Leal JP (2017) An emotional word analyzer for Portuguese. In: Queirós R, Pinto M, Simões
A, Leal JP, Varanda MJ (eds) Proceedings of the symposium on languages, applications and technologies (SLATE), Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, Dagstuhl, Germany,
OpenAccess Series in Informatics (OASIcs), vol 56, pp 17:1–17:14. https​://doi.org/10.4230/OASIc​
s.SLATE​.2017.17; http://drops​.dagst​uhl.de/opus/vollt​exte/2017/7958
Martins RF, Pereira A, Benevenuto F (2015) An approach to sentiment analysis of web applications in
Portuguese. In: Proceedings of the 21st Brazilian symposium on multimedia and the web (WebMedia). ACM, Manaus, Brazil, pp 105–112. https​://doi.org/10.1145/28204​26.28204​46
Medhat W, Hassan A, Korashy H (2014) Sentiment analysis algorithms and applications: a survey. Ain
Shams Eng J 5(4):1093–1113
Moraes SMW, Machado RM, Redecker M, Cadaval R, Meneguzzi F (2017) A study on irony within the
context of 7x1-pt corpus. In: Proceedings of the 11th Brazilian symposium in information and human
language technology (STIL), pp 27–31. https​://aclan​tholo​gy.info/paper​s/W17-6604/w17-6604
Moussallem D, Sherif MA, Esteves D, Zampieri M, Ngonga Ngomo AC (2018) LIdioms: a multilingual linked idioms data set. In: Proceedings of the eleventh international conference on language
resources and evaluation (LREC). European Language Resources Association (ELRA), Miyazaki,
Japan. https​://www.aclwe​b.org/antho​logy/L18-1392
Padró L, Stanilovsky E (2012) FreeLing 3.0: towards wider multilinguality. In: Proceedings of the
eighth international conference on language resources and evaluation (LREC). European Language
Resources Association (ELRA), Istanbul, Turkey, pp 2473–2479. http://www.lrec-conf.org/proce​
eding​s/lrec2​012/pdf/430_Paper​.pdf
Pardo TAS, Gasperin C, de Medeiros Caseli H, das Graas Volpe Nunes M (2010) Computational linguistics in Brazil: an overview. In: Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 young investigators workshop
on computational approaches to languages of the Americas, Los Angeles, USA, pp 1–7
Peng H, Cambria E, Hussain A (2017) A review of sentiment analysis research in Chinese language.
Cogn Comput 9:423–435. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1255​9-017-9470-8

13

1114

D. A. Pereira

Pennebaker JW, Francis ME, Booth RJ (2001) Linguistic inquiry and word count, 2nd edn. Psychology
Press, London
Petter M (2008) O léxico compartilhado pelo português angolano, brasileiro e moçambicano. Veredas:
Revista da Associação Internacional de Lusitanistas 9:61–81
Poria S, Cambria E, Howard N, Huang GB, Hussain A (2016) Fusing audio, visual and textual clues for sentiment analysis from multimodal content. Neurocomputing 174:50–59. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuco​
m.2015.01.095
Rajadesingan A, Zafarani R, Liu H (2015) Sarcasm detection on twitter: a behavioral modeling approach.
In: Proceedings of the eighth ACM international conference on web search and data mining. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, WSDM ’15, pp 97–106. https​://doi.org/10.1145/26848​22.26853​16
Rodrigues J, Pagano A, Paraiso E (2017) Estudo exploratório de categorias gramaticais com potencial de indicadores para a análise de sentimentos. In: Proceedings of the 11th Brazilian symposium
in information and human language technology, (STIL), pp 17–21. https​://aclan​tholo​gy.info/paper​s/
W17-6602/w17-6602
Sabour S, Frosst N, Hinton GE (2017) Dynamic routing between capsules. In: Proceedings of the 31st international conference on neural information processing systems. Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY,
USA, pp 3859–3869
Saias J, Mourao MM, Oliveira E (2018) Detailing sentiment analysis to consider entity aspects: an approach
for Portuguese short texts. Trans Mach Learn Artif Intell 6(2):26–35. https​://doi.org/10.14738​/tmlai​
.62.4379
Schmid H (1994) Probabilistic part-of-speech tagging using decision trees. In: Proceedings of international
conference on new methods in language processing, Manchester, UK
Shakeel MH, Alghamidi T, Faizullah S, Khan I (2019) Language independent sentiment analysis. arXiv​
:19121​1973
Silva MJ, Carvalho P, Sarmento L (2012) Building a sentiment lexicon for social judgement mining. In:
Caseli H, Villavicencio A, Teixeira A, Perdigão F (eds) Proceedings of the international conference on
processing of the Portuguese language (PROPOR). Springer, Berlin, pp 218–228
Soleymani M, Garcia D, Jou B, Schuller B, Chang SF, Pantic M (2017) A survey of multimodal sentiment
analysis. Image Vis Comput 65:3–14. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.imavi​s.2017.08.003
Souza M, Vieira R (2012) Sentiment analysis on twitter data for Portuguese language. In: Caseli H, Villavicencio A, Teixeira A, Perdigão F (eds) Proceedings of the 10th international conference on computational processing of the Portuguese language (PROPOR). Springer, Berlin, Coimbra, Portugal, pp
241–247
Souza M, Vieira R, Busetti D, de Oliveira Chishman RL, da Rosa Alves IM (2011) Construction of a Portuguese opinion lexicon from multiple resources. In: Proceedings of the 8th Brazilian symposium in
information and human language technology, Cuiabá, Brazil, pp 59–66
Souza E, Alves T, Teles I, Oliveira ALI, Gusmão C (2016a) TOPIE: an open-source opinion mining pipeline to analyze consumers’ sentiment in Brazilian Portuguese. In: Proceedings of the 12th international
conference on computational processing of the portuguese language (PROPOR). Springer, Tomar, Portugal, pp 95–105
Souza E, Vitório D, Castro D, Oliveira ALI, Gusmão C (2016b) Characterizing opinion mining: a systematic mapping study of the portuguese language. In: Silva J, Ribeiro R, Quaresma P, Adami A, Branco
A (eds) Proceedings of the 12th international conference on computational processing of the Portuguese language (PROPOR). Springer, Tomar, Portugal, pp 122–127
Steiner-Correa F, Viedma-del Jesus MI, Lopez-Herrera AG (2018) A survey of multilingual humantagged short message datasets for sentiment analysis tasks. Soft Comput 22:8227–8242. https​://doi.
org/10.1007/s0050​0-017-2766-5
Stranisci M, Bosco C, Farias H, Irazu D, Patti V (2016) Annotating sentiment and irony in the online Italian
political debate on #labuonascuola. In: Proceedings of the tenth international conference on language
resources and evaluation (LREC), elra, pp 2892–2899
Thelwall M (2017) The heart and soul of the web: sentiment strength detection in the social web with sentistrength. Springer, Berlin. https​://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-43639​-5_7
Tumitan D, Becker K (2013) Tracking sentiment evolution on user-generated content: a case study on the
Brazilian political scene. In: Proceedings of the Brazilian symposium on databases (SBBD), Recife,
PE, pp 139–144
Vargas FA, Pardo TAS (2018a) Aspect clustering methods for sentiment analysis. In: Proceedings of the
13th international conference on computational processing of the Portuguese language (PROPOR),
Canela, Brazil, pp 365–374. https​://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-99722​-3_37
Vargas FA, Pardo TAS (2018b) Hierarchical clustering of aspects for opinion mining: a corpus study. Instituto de Letras/UFRGS, Porto Alegre, pp 69–91

13

A survey of sentiment analysis in the Portuguese language﻿	

1115

Vilares D, Peng H, Satapathy R, Cambria E (2018) Babelsenticnet: a commonsense reasoning framework
for multilingual sentiment analysis. In: Proceedings of the IEEE symposium series on computational
intelligence (SSCI). IEEE, pp 1292–1298. https​://doi.org/10.1109/SSCI.2018.86287​18
Vitório D, Souza EPR, Pereira I, Oliveira A (2017) Investigating opinion mining through language varieties:
a case study of Brazilian and European Portuguese tweets. In: Proceedings of the 11th Brazilian symposium in information and human language technology (STIL), pp 43–52
Wehrmann J, Becker W, Cagnini HEL, Barros RC (2017) A character-based convolutional neural network
for language-agnostic twitter sentiment analysis. In: Proceedings of the international joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN), Anchorage, USA, pp 2384–2391. https​://doi.org/10.1109/IJCNN​
.2017.79661​45
Yadollahi A, Shahraki AG, Zaiane OR (2017) Current state of text sentiment analysis from opinion to emotion mining. ACM Comput Surv 50(2):25:1–25:33. https​://doi.org/10.1145/30572​70
Young T, Hazarika D, Poria S, Cambria E (2018) Recent trends in deep learning based natural language
processing. IEEE Comput Intell Mag 13(3):55–75. https​://doi.org/10.1109/MCI.2018.28407​38
Zafra SMJ, Valdivia MTM, Camara EM, Lopez LAU (2019) Studying the scope of negation for Spanish
sentiment analysis on twitter. IEEE Trans Affect Comput 10(1):129–141. https​://doi.org/10.1109/
TAFFC​.2017.26939​68
Zhang L, Liu B (2014) Aspect and entity extraction for opinion mining. Springer, book Chapter, volume 1
of the series studies in big data
Zhang S, Zhang X, Chan J (2017) A word-character convolutional neural network for language-agnostic
twitter sentiment analysis. In: Proceedings of the 22nd Australasian document computing symposium,
association for computing machinery, New York, NY, USA. https​://doi.org/10.1145/31660​72.31660​82
Zhang L, Wang S, Liu B (2018) Deep learning for sentiment analysis: a survey. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Data
Min Knowl Discov 8(4):e1253. https​://doi.org/10.1002/widm.1253
Zhao W, Peng H, Eger S, Cambria E, Yang M (2019) Towards scalable and reliable capsule networks for
challenging NLP applications. In: Proceedings of the 57th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, association for computational linguistics, Florence, Italy, pp 1549–1559. https​://
doi.org/10.18653​/v1/P19-1150; https​://www.aclwe​b.org/antho​logy/P19-1150
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.

13

