INACIA: Integrating Large Language Models in Brazilian Audit
Courts: Opportunities and Challenges
JAYR PEREIRA, NeuralMind.ai, Campinas, Brazil and University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil
ANDRE ASSUMPCAO, National Center for State Courts (NCSC), Williamsburg, United States and Brazilian
Association of Jurimetrics (ABJ), São Paulo, Brazil
JULIO TRECENTI, Terranova Consultoria, São Paulo, Brazil
LUIZ AIROSA, Brazilian Federal Court of Accounts (TCU), Brasília, Brazil
CAIO LENTE, Terranova Consultoria, São Paulo, Brazil
JHONATAN CLÉTO, NeuralMind.ai, Campinas, Brazil and University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil
GUILHERME DOBINS, NeuralMind.ai, Campinas, Brazil and University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil
RODRIGO NOGUEIRA, NeuralMind.ai, Campinas, Brazil and University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil
LUIS MITCHELL, Brazilian Federal Court of Accounts (TCU), Brasília, Brazil
ROBERTO LOTUFO, NeuralMind.ai, Campinas, Brazil and University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil
This article introduces Instrução Assistida com Inteligência Artificial (INACIA), a groundbreaking system designed to integrate Large Language Models (LLMs) into the operational framework of Brazilian Federal Court of Accounts. The system
automates various stages of case analysis, including basic information extraction, admissibility examination, Periculum in
mora and Fumus boni iuris analyses, and recommendations generation. Through a series of experiments, we demonstrate
INACIA’s potential in extracting relevant information from case documents, evaluating its legal plausibility, and formulating propositions for judicial decision-making. Utilizing a validation dataset alongside LLMs, our evaluation methodology,
to the best of our knowledge, presents a novel approach to assessing system performance, correlating highly with human
judgment. These results underscore INACIA’s potential in complex legal task handling while also acknowledging the current
limitations. This study discusses possible improvements and the broader implications of applying Artificial Intelligence (AI)
in legal contexts, suggesting that INACIA represents a significant step toward integrating AI in legal systems globally, albeit
with cautious optimism grounded in the empirical findings.
CCS Concepts: • Applied computing → Law; • Information systems → Information extraction; • Computing
methodologies → Natural language processing; • General and reference → Empirical studies;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Brazilian Federal Court of Accounts (TCU), Large Language Models (LLMs), Artificial
Intelligence-Assisted Legal Instruction, AI in Legal Systems
Authors’ addresses: J. Pereira, J. Cleto, G. Dobins, R. Nogueira, and R. Lotufo, NeuralMind.ai, Av. Alan Turing, 345 –Sala 5, Cidade
Universitária, Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil and University of Campinas, Avenida Albert Einstein, n◦ 901 -Cidade Universitária, Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil; e-mails: jayr.pereira@neuralmind.ai, jhonatan.cleto@neuralmind.ai, guilherme.dobins@neuralmind.ai, rodrigo.
nogueira@neuralmind.ai, roberto@neuralmind.ai; A. Assumpcao, National Center for State Courts (NCSC), 300 Newport Ave, Williamsburg, Virginia, United States and Brazilian Association of Jurimetrics (ABJ), Rua Bela Cintra, 768 - Cj. 102 - Consolação, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil;
e-mail: aas-sumpcao@ncsc.org; J. Trecenti and C. Lente, Terranova Consultoria, Rua Bela Cintra, 722 - Cj. 102 - Consolação, Sao Paulo, Sao
Paulo, Brazil; e-mails: jtrecenti@trnv.com.br, clente@trnv.com.br; L. Airosa and L. Mitchell, Brazilian Federal Court of Accounts (TCU), SAFS
Quadra 4, Lote 1, Brasilia, Distrito Federal, Brazil; emails: airosac@tcu.gov.br, luishr@tcu.gov.br.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions
from permissions@acm.org.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 2639-0175/2025/02-ART6
https://doi.org/10.1145/3652951
Digit. Gov. Res. Pract., Vol. 6, No. 1, Article 6. Publication date: February 2025.

6:2 • J. Pereira et al.
ACM Reference Format:
Jayr Pereira, Andre Assumpcao, Julio Trecenti, Luiz Airosa, Caio Lente, Jhonatan Cléto, Guilherme Dobins, Rodrigo Nogueira,
Luis Mitchell, and Roberto Lotufo. 2025. INACIA: Integrating Large Language Models in Brazilian Audit Courts: Opportunities
and Challenges. Digit. Gov. Res. Pract. 6, 1, Article 6 (February 2025), 20 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3652951

1

INTRODUCTION

Large Language Models (LLMs) have emerged as a pivotal innovation in the artificial intelligence space, altering our interaction with digital technologies. Their applications span a diverse spectrum, including but not
limited to information retrieval, data extraction, text classification, machine translation, and question answering
[12]. Beyond these conventional domains, LLMs demonstrate remarkable capabilities in areas such as standardized testing, creative writing [24], and even complex decision-making tasks in business and legal environments
[5, 28]. This versatility showcases their ability to generate insights and solutions that are contextually relevant.
In this article, we introduce a groundbreaking application of LLMs for administrative case processing and
assisted decision-making developed jointly by the Tribunal de Contas da União (TCU) (or Brazilian Federal
Court of Accounts) and experts at several Brazilian research organizations. Instrução Assistida com Inteligência Artificial (INACIA) (or Artificial Intelligence–Assisted Legal Instruction) is a system that suggests adjudication directions to court decision-makers—consisting of structured reasoning around cases’ claims, evidence, and
relationship to legal provisions in Brazilian law. TCU’s staff auditors draw from INACIA’s analytical support but
ultimately bear the responsibility of making adjudication recommendations to court decision-makers. Its inputs
are case filings; outputs are suggestions to the auditor to write the initial instruction.1 INACIA uses a combination of pre-trained LLMs and search engines to extract information from case documents and to reason through
the extracted information.
Importantly, INACIA goal’s is to expedite case adjudication as it sifts through case documents and connects
claims, evidence, and legal provisions. INACIA, however, is not replacing skilled auditors; instead, it is augmenting their productivity. By handling routine and straightforward tasks, INACIA allows auditors to focus on more
complex, analytical tasks, thereby deepening the overall effectiveness and efficiency of TCU staff.
The main challenge in developing systems like INACIA is evaluating their performance. How can we ensure
the quality of the produced text and extracted data? To address this challenge, we construct a validation dataset
from TCU’s case filings and propose a methodology that uses LLMs to evaluate the system’s outputs. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first evaluation of this kind in the legal domain. We demonstrate that our
methodology is highly correlated with human evaluation and can be used to evaluate the system’s performance.
Our results demonstrate that INACIA can produce high-quality text for the initial instruction but also forewarn
the need for further research to improve the quality of the system’s outputs.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of TCU and the role of
Artificial Intelligence (AI) in its operations. Section 3 reviews the related work in the field of AI and LLMs in
legal settings. Section 4 introduces INACIA, detailing its case processing pipeline and the challenges it addresses.
Section 5 presents the experiments conducted to evaluate INACIA’s performance, including the validation dataset
and the evaluation methodology. Section 6 discusses the results of the experiments and their implications. Section 7 discusses the broader implications of INACIA and the challenges of integrating AI in legal systems. Finally,
Section 8 concludes the article and outlines future research directions.

2

APPLICATION DOMAIN

The Brazilian Federal Court of Accounts is the external control institution that supports the National Congress
with the mission of overseeing the budget and the financial execution of the federal government. TCU issues
1 The initial instruction is the document that contains the directions written by the auditor, including the main facts of the case, the legal

basis, and the adjudication proposals.
Digit. Gov. Res. Pract., Vol. 6, No. 1, Article 6. Publication date: February 2025.

Integrating Large Language Models in Brazilian Audit Courts: Opportunities and Challenges

•

6:3

rulings that serve to prevent deviations from established norms, offers guidance, recommends enhancements,
and, when deemed necessary, imposes administrative sanctions on government agencies and agents implicated
in any form of misconduct.

2.1 Role and Responsibilities
In most contemporary democracies, a network of institutions exists to regulate, investigate, and potentially
sanction individuals occupying elected and non-elected office for improperly using public funds [27]. Despite
corruption often dominating media attention, mismanagement of public resources makes up the majority of
audit findings across Brazil [8]. TCU occupies a premier position within the control network of the Brazilian
government and is seen as a model institution for auditing practices across the country.2

2.2 Artificial Intelligence and TCU
AI technologies are not new to TCU. Over the past 5 years, court developers have worked on systems to classify documents by type, summarize case documents, and efficiently search and retrieve case law information to
support decisions. Recently, TCU created its ChatGPT-based conversational assistant to handle unstructured, internal information. In 2023, TCU inaugurated an Artificial Intelligence Center (or Núcleo de Inteligência Artificial),
whose goal is to guide and implement responsible, ethical use of AI in the Court.

2.3 Audit Case Processing
TCU investigates (and eventually issues rulings on) the use of federal funds in two ways: (1) when TCU independently audits federal agencies (or anyone using federal funds) or (2) when TCU receives complaints filed by
individuals, private entities, or public agencies on the misuse of federal funds.
While case proceedings may vary based on the initiation method, case processing is typically a time-intensive
task primarily handled by TCU staff. Auditors must review case filings, confirm whether TCU should hear the
case, search and append external evidence of wrongdoing (if necessary), check claims against case law and federal
statutes, and apply the Court’s jurisprudence. Finally, they prepare a document called Instrução (instruction)
that summarizes the case, the evidence, and the legal analysis and proposes adjudication recommendations. The
instruction is then sent to the court’s judicial panel for final adjudication. Despite the variability in human effort
required for each case, it can be reasonably estimated that the review of a single case necessitates approximately
30 h, incurring a cost of approximately $1,750 before the case is even presented to the court’s judicial panel.
Given an annual average processing rate of about 2,000 cases within the INACIA project’s purview and the
task’s textual nature, audit case processing is an ideal candidate for an LLM application that would help expedite
review while reducing costs.3

2.4 Large Language Models in Brazilian Legal Settings
Though natural language processing (NLP) applications have been familiar to courts both in Brazil and worldwide for some time, the use of large language models as the engine behind NLP applications is relatively new—
only recently courts across the world have begun using LLMs for document summarization, chatbots, writing
briefs, and so on [20].
TCU is a particularly interesting use case as it predates the popularization of LLMs through OpenAI GPT
models in late 2022 and throughout 2023. Acknowledging the rapid evolution of AI and in line with its mission
to foster innovation and enhance public administration, TCU carried out a series of pre-commercial procurement
2 Each state within Brazil, along with a select number of municipalities, maintains its audit court, which typically draws inspiration for its

guidelines from the Federal Court of Accounts (TCU).
3 For comparison purposes, INACIA processes a case in under 20 minutes and at an initial cost of $10, subject to further human review. A

mere 1% reduction in the time required for a human to process a case would suffice to offset the costs associated with INACIA.
Digit. Gov. Res. Pract., Vol. 6, No. 1, Article 6. Publication date: February 2025.

6:4 • J. Pereira et al.
studies between 2019 and 2022 to design a public procurement call for an AI-powered solution to expedite audit
case processing. Open for bidding in early 2022, this procurement call was the first of its kind in Brazil as it sought
to contract a pre-market AI product requiring research and development and carrying significant technological
risk (the solution envisioned by TCU should go beyond the state-of-the-art NLP tools available then).
INACIA was the winning proposal of this procurement call. A team of researchers at the State University of
Campinas and start-ups NeuralMind and Terranova Consultoria put together the only proposal to use an LLM
to handle all NLP tasks needed in the audit processing product (detailed in the following sections). Back in early
2022, LLMs were fairly unknown outside of the NLP expert community and were not consensually seen as the
way forward in NLP research. TCU, however, trusted the INACIA proposal, and this article is based on the work
done during the proof of concept development stage.
TCU goals are to focus auditors’ expertise on the most challenging tasks of case processing while handing
over the more routine tasks to the AI system. This strategy is well aligned with the evidence on how best to
incorporate technology for productivity gains and labor output augmentation [1]. The current expectation is that
AI will change how TCU handles cases from a sequential, step-by-step approach to a more holistic approach in
which filings are evaluated simultaneously and connected to external resources necessary for decision-making
from the outset. Effectively, this system would eliminate redundancies and streamline case processing without
requiring regulation change.

3

RELATED WORK

AI and LLMs are now part of products and services across various jurisdictions and domains, highlighting a
global movement toward technologically enhanced legal systems. Some of these include Chalkidis et al. [4], who
developed Legal-BERT, a domain-specific adaptation of BERT for legal documents, demonstrating the effectiveness of language models in legal document analysis and information extraction. Similarly, Safaei and Longo [22]
focused on zero-shot text matching for financial auditing using LLMs, showcasing the potential of AI in improving the accuracy and efficiency of legal and financial document processing. The work of Hillebrand et al. [11]
further extends this by presenting ZeroShotALI, a system that leverages LLMs for recommending relevant legal
texts, underlining the advancements in AI-driven legal recommendation systems.
Additionally, the exploration of GPT models in zero-shot settings for legal text annotation by Savelka [23] provides insights into the capabilities of LLMs in the semantic understanding and classification of legal documents.
Paul et al. [18] complements this investigation into pre-training LLMs on Indian legal corpus, which enriches the
models’ understanding of legal texts from different legal systems and highlights the adaptability and scalability
of AI techniques in diverse legal environments.
Finally, Sipra et al. [25] assesses the challenges and opportunities in AI-driven criminal justice systems, addressing ethical, transparency, and accountability issues, which are critical in the application of AI within legal
systems. These works collectively underscore the transformative potential of AI and LLMs in legal research,
practice, and administration, offering valuable insights for the integration of such technologies into the TCU
through INACIA.

4 THE INACIA PROJECT
4.1 Overview
As stated previously, INACIA’s goal is to assist TCU auditors in streamlining case adjudication while refocusing
their tasks to high-value-added work, e.g., replacing routine tasks of information extraction for tasks requiring
critical reasoning over the combination of a case’s claims, the applicable legal framework, and evidence brought
forth by plaintiffs. The main advantage of using pre-trained LLMs is that they can work in a few-shot or zeroshot setting, meaning that they can be used to process cases without the need for training on a specific dataset or
domain. This is particularly important in the TCU context, as the number of cases is relatively small compared to
Digit. Gov. Res. Pract., Vol. 6, No. 1, Article 6. Publication date: February 2025.

Integrating Large Language Models in Brazilian Audit Courts: Opportunities and Challenges

•

6:5

Fig. 1. End-to-end INACIA pipeline (from case documents to initial instruction).

the datasets usually used to train LLMs. OpenAI’s models, for example, are trained on a huge dataset of internet
text,4 which allows them to understand and generate text in a wide range of domains and languages. Using
search engines, however, allows INACIA to access external information, such as case law and legal provisions,
which are not present in the case documents and potentially not present (or present in an insignificant amount)
in the training data of the LLMs. It allows INACIA to overcome one of the most common limitations of LLMs,
which is the lack of access to external information and the tendency to generate text that is not grounded in
reality (a.k.a. hallucination).
Figure 1 depicts INACIA’s main case processing pipeline, showcasing the holistic nature of case analysis and
how much of the work done by auditors can be replaced by INACIA work. While there is a direct, sequential flow
(i.e., solid arrows) of tasks (i.e., blue boxes) needed to produce the instruction (case adjudication suggestion), the
dashed lines show the association (or dependency) between tasks. The lighter grey boxes indicate data objects
needed to start processing or to be produced as intermediate or final products for other TCU systems.5 In the
next subsections, we describe each element of this pipeline in detail.

4.2 Inputs
The pipeline starts off ingesting all documents available at case submission (“Case documents” grey box). There
are two sets of documents in the submission package: (1) the main document is the representação (in Portuguese),
which is in nature similar to a civil complaint. It is a formal document laying out the claims of wrongdoing and
why TCU should take the case and (2) supporting documents containing the evidence of wrongdoing as presented
by the plaintiff. For example, if the plaintiff alleges that the defendant has not complied with a contract, then the
contract is a document that supports the case.
None of these documents follow a strict format. Lawyers are free to petition TCU in any way as long as the
main sections of their complaint follow the guidelines set by the TCU. The representação, thus, is a free-form
4 OpenAI does not disclose the exact size of the dataset used to train its models, but it is known to be in the order of hundreds of gigabytes.
5 INACIA is available to TCU in two formats: (1) a Python API that can be executed end-to-end from an interactive shell, e.g., a Jupyter

Notebook, or from source or via classes and methods that handle each component of the pipeline as an independent module; and (2) a
staging environment developed for presenting INACIA’s proof of concept to the business team at TCU. In either case, the outputs of one
INACIA module are the inputs to the next module. INACIA is currently designed to run end-to-end with no human intervention—though its
execution could be broken out and interspersed with manual checkpoints along the way. The backend of INACIA is entirely structured in
the Azure Cloud and the user has the option of choosing any of the pre-trained language models available by Microsoft on its Azure Portal.
Digit. Gov. Res. Pract., Vol. 6, No. 1, Article 6. Publication date: February 2025.

6:6 • J. Pereira et al.

Fig. 2. Examples of files typically found in TCU’s case database.

text document and the supporting documents can be anything (from pictures to invoices to full procurement
contracts). There is no set range of pages for either type of document. Figure 2 contains snapshots of files typically
found in TCU’s case database. Figure 2(a) shows a representação in a native PDF format, and Figure 2(b) shows
a supporting document (a business incorporation document) in a scanned image format.
Both the representação and supporting documents are stored in multiple formats, and they can be classified
in one of two categories: (1) searchable files: electronically created files with searchable content (e.g., native PDF
document or MS Word document printed as PDF), and (2) unsearchable files: scanned physical files or images
whose content is not searchable (e.g., a photo of a contract or signature). Since INACIA uses the textual content
of case documents to perform its tasks, we needed to implement data extraction solutions to handle all file types.
These solutions needed to deliver high-quality extraction at a low cost for the solution to be sustainable once
TCU takes the system to production.
Most files in TCU’s case database are searchable and primarily stored as PDF documents. Thus, the first implemented solution is a standard PDF extraction pipeline using the Apache Tika framework [3], which can handle
Digit. Gov. Res. Pract., Vol. 6, No. 1, Article 6. Publication date: February 2025.

Integrating Large Language Models in Brazilian Audit Courts: Opportunities and Challenges

•

6:7

all types of searchable files in TCU’s case database. Besides being an open source tool (thus meeting the lowcost criterion), Tika delivered better results in text extraction than PyPDF2 [7], another popular framework for
processing searchable PDF documents. We compared and contrasted Tika and PyPDF2 in the following ways:
(1) determining which framework was better at extracting textual content and its structure (e.g., a two-column
document processed as separate, two columns instead of a single column with left-to-right text mixing up the
two columns) and (2) determining which framework was better at extracting characters from different encoding
formats (e.g., those not present in UTF-8, Latin-1, or Windows-1252 encodings). Tika performed better in both
criteria—we particularly liked that it reports the count of invalid characters in the processed text as extraction
metadata, allowing us to create a measure of extraction quality by computing the percentage of invalid characters
over all characters extracted.
Whenever Tika fails in text extraction (i.e., it reported zero searchable characters after processing the text),
INACIA then deploys the second text extraction solution, which relies on Microsoft’s Azure Form Recognizer
service for Optical Character Recognition (OCR) [16]. Form Recognizer ingests any unsearchable file and
returns the extracted text in plain format. We also compared Form Recognizer to other industry-leading OCR
frameworks (Tesseract [26], and Google Cloud Vision [10]) using the high-quality and low-cost criteria. While
they are similarly priced, Form Recognizer had higher-quality results and richer extraction metadata (e.g., information on the position and content of tables). To assess text extraction from either document type, we evaluated
results qualitatively. We manually compared extracted elements from case documents, such as the position of
tables, columns, and text, allowing for a more nuanced understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of each
tool in practical scenarios. We evaluated a sample of documents from TCU’s database containing all cases and
their documents between 2019 and 2022. We pulled out a minimum of five documents per year. Within these
documents, we had at least one document of easy, medium, and hard extraction, determined by the number of
pages and their content as follows: (1) Easy: up to 10-page documents with minimal tables; (2) Medium: up to
25-page documents with structured data or images; and (3) Hard: over 25-page documents with structured and
unstructured data elements, images, or handwritten content.

4.3 Extraction of Basic Information and Allegations and Requests
The first two tasks (blue boxes in Figure 1) are the extraction of case summary information (“Basic information
extraction” blue box), the allegations of wrongdoing made by the plaintiff (allegations) and what action they ask
TCU to take (requests) (“Extraction of allegations and requests” blue box). We describe each task in the sections
below.
4.3.1 Basic Information Extraction. Figure 3 illustrates the approach used for basic information extraction.
The solid lines indicate the flow of information between components of the system (in grey are the data objects,
in blue the agent components and in orange technologies external to the main INACIA pipeline); the work done
by INACIA’s basic information extraction agent is depicted by the bounded box. It is a structured and systematic
process relying on prompt engineering and retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) techniques [14]. First, we
feed the LLM a structured list of the information we need to extract from case documents (“Pre-defined form”
green box). This list was constructed using older cases, and their representação containing the information TCU
needs to retain for record-keeping purposes.6 We also provide the model with detailed explanations of what
each of the variables is. Finally, we append to our combined prompt from above the first two pages of a case’s
representação (“Main document” gray box), which should contain most of the information needed.
We deploy our RAG workflow when we cannot find all necessary information in the first pages of the representação. Along with extracting all textual content from case documents, we created searchable indexes of
case documents. We allowed the LLM to reason through the form and query such indexes if it did not find the
6 “Basic information” examples are the case ID, case type, plaintiff name, plaintiff ID, etc.

Digit. Gov. Res. Pract., Vol. 6, No. 1, Article 6. Publication date: February 2025.

6:8 • J. Pereira et al.

Fig. 3. Pipeline used for Basic Information Extraction.

information in the first two pages of the main case document. An example that helps illustrate this mechanism is
that TCU staff often need to look at federal agencies’ procurement documents to evaluate whether the agencies
have followed all necessary rules when contracting external vendors. INACIA can search supporting documents
of a case to find procurement contracts and retrieve the necessary information (the rightmost side of Figure 3
illustrates this process). We use standard industry-leading search algorithms, such as BM25 [21], to retrieve the
relevant passages from the indexed case documents. The LLM then processes these passages to extract answers,
ensuring a streamlined and consistent approach. For retrieving the remaining information using BM25, we manually crafted pre-defined queries. The resulting information is then fed into the LLM for the final extraction,
completing the form. In this workflow, the LLM functions not as an intelligent agent but rather as a tool within
the pipeline for interpreting search results.
4.3.2 Extraction of Allegations and Requests. An important step in our pipeline is to assess whether a case’s
claims and supporting evidence are strong. Often, TCU staff can turn down the review of a case when there
is weak evidence of wrongdoing, when the plaintiff cannot straightforwardly articulate their claims that the
defendant has broken the law in some shape or form or even when the plaintiff does not clearly states their
request for TCU action. As with other tasks, extracting allegations and actions requested by plaintiffs is a timeconsuming task suited for LLM processing.
In Figure 4, we present the prompt used at this pipeline step. It has four main characteristics: (1) the instruction
(identified by the title “## Instruction”), which tells the model its role and what we want it to do; (2) the example
(identified by the title “## Example”), which teach the model the expected structure and language of the text;
(3) the rules (identified by the title “## Rules”), which are the constraints that the model must follow to generate
the extract the allegations and requests; and (4) the input, i.e., the case’s main document, from which the model
will extract the allegations and requests.
For this step, we used OpenAI’s GPT-4 model with a context length of 32,000 tokens. The main advantage
of this model is that it does not require fine-tuning or additional training. Besides, it was trained to generate
humanlike text, which is essential for the INACIA project. The high context length is also important because the
documents can be long and complex, and the model needs to understand the context to generate the allegations
and requests correctly.
The data extracted in this step (allegations and requests) are used in three ways: (1) for the admissibility
examination, where INACIA reviews cases for elements that would make such case “of public interest” and
whether the claims are strong enough to hear the case; (2) for drafting the initial instruction document (cf.
Digit. Gov. Res. Pract., Vol. 6, No. 1, Article 6. Publication date: February 2025.

Integrating Large Language Models in Brazilian Audit Courts: Opportunities and Challenges

•

6:9

Fig. 4. Prompt used to extract the allegations and requests in a representação.

Section 4.7); and (3) for the Fumus Boni Iuris analysis, which means evaluating a case for the likelihood of success
on its merits (cf. Section 4.6).

4.4 Admissibility Examination
The next step in the INACIA project is to conduct an admissibility examination (“Admissibility exam” blue box
in Figure 1). The admissibility examination is a preliminary examination conducted by auditors to determine
whether the claims meet the minimum legal criteria to proceed (i.e., whether TCU should hear the case). TCU
defines the five following criteria that must be met for a claim to be admissible:
(1) Legitimacy: the case should be submitted by a legitimate plaintiff (as defined in TCU’s bylaws);
(2) Competency: whether the wrongdoing falls within the jurisdiction of TCU (“competency” is the literal
translation from Portuguese);
(3) Existence of evidence: whether there is enough evidence supporting plaintiff’s claims;
(4) Existence of public interest: whether the case is of public interest (as determined by potential (non-)monetary
damage to the federal government).
(5) Clear writing and language: whether the representação has been written clearly and objectively.
As shown in Figure 5, we used an approach similar to the one used for basic information extraction. We applied an LLM as an intelligent agent capable of reasoning and interpreting legal documents. However, instead
of feeding the LLM with the first two pages of the case’s representação, we allow the model to search for information in case documents using a search engine including four external databases: (1) TCU’s jurisprudence
database, (2) TCU’s statutes and federal law, (3) TCU’s internal codes and other documents, and (4) the case’s
documents.
The admissibility examination is initiated by feeding the LLM one admissibility criterion. Then, the LLM
searches for information in case documents and external databases to determine whether the case meets such
admissibility criterion. For example, consider the admissibility criterion of legitimacy. The agent may search for
the plaintiff’s information in the case documents and for information about who can file a claim in the external
databases (e.g., the court’s internal codes). If the agent finds information that confirms a plaintiff’s legitimacy,
then the agent concludes that the claim meets the admissibility criterion. Otherwise, the agent concludes that
the claim does not meet the admissibility criterion. This process is repeated for each admissibility criterion.
Digit. Gov. Res. Pract., Vol. 6, No. 1, Article 6. Publication date: February 2025.

6:10 •

J. Pereira et al.

Fig. 5. Approach used for admissibility examination.

In this task, the agent can compose queries to search for information in case documents and external databases.
For example, the agent may want to compose the query “Quem tem legitimidade para apresentar uma representação ao TCU?” (i.e., “Who has legitimacy to file a claim to the TCU?”) to search for information on who can file
a claim in external databases. If that is the case, then the agent should not be limited to pre-defined queries and
keyword-based queries. To facilitate this, we employ NeuralSearchX [2], a search engine that integrates the capabilities of the BM25 algorithm and a neural reranker [17], fine-tuned for Brazilian Portuguese. NeuralSearchX
first retrieves documents containing the words from the query and then utilizes its re-ranking mechanism to
prioritize the most relevant documents.
In addition to searching, we used an approach based on the Visconde system [19] to reason through the information retrieved from case documents and external databases. Visconde is a multi-document question-answering
system integrating information retrieval algorithms and LLMs to answer questions. The reasoning step is based
on the Chain-of-Thought approach [13] and produces a paragraph explaining how the documents support the
model’s answer.

4.5 Periculum in mora Analysis
The Periculum in Mora (Latin for “danger in delay”) analysis is an essential part of INACIA, as it relates to the
urgency with which TCU needs to take action in any particular case. It determines whether immediate action is
required to prevent further damage or prejudice to the parties involved.
For this analysis, we carry out a search for exact matches of minuta de contrato (draft contract) in all case
documents after a case has been assigned to a TCU staff, except when the case contains fewer than five documents,
in which case all documents are considered. This search is essential to flag documents mentioning the draft
contract so they are not included in subsequent steps. Two key rules are used to standardize the decision on
whether there is Periculum in mora: (1) the existence of an active or signed contract (there is no danger in delay
since TCU cannot prevent a contract from coming into force) and (2) the existence of events that prove delay,
cancellation, or impediment in contracting (there is no danger in delay because the execution of a contract has
been halted). The verification of these rules occurs stepwise. We first verify whether there is any indication that a
goods or service provision contract has been signed or is active. The verification is done directly from a keyword
search and indirectly by asking the LLM to reason through the documents and verify the existence and status of
procurement contracts. The second step is verifying any event delaying, canceling, or suspending a contract from
entering into force. Here, we do not perform a direct keyword search for such information—we send documents
and prompts straight to the LLM. The outcome of these searches provides an answer regarding the existence of an
active contract and any delays or impediments. Finally, the findings are synthesized into a dictionary containing
information about the presence of an active contract or delays, along with the document IDs from each search
and a suggested decision on whether there is Periculum in mora, which can be either “rejected” or “accepted.”
Digit. Gov. Res. Pract., Vol. 6, No. 1, Article 6. Publication date: February 2025.

Integrating Large Language Models in Brazilian Audit Courts: Opportunities and Challenges

• 6:11

It is important to note that the role of the LLM is limited to receiving search results and determining the
existence of an active contract or impediments and delays. The decision-making flows are hard-coded and not
subject to the LLM’s discretion. After the decision is made, the result is passed onto the LLM along with a
prompt laying out decision rules, enabling the LLM to draft the text that will be included in the initial instruction
document. This process ensures that the conclusions drawn from the Periculum in mora analysis are accurately
reflected in the official documentation, preserving the integrity of TCU’s case review process.

4.6 Fumus Boni Iuris Analysis
The Fumus boni iuris analysis (Latin for “smoke of good law”) is also an essential part of INACIA; it refers to
the “appearance of good law” or the likelihood of success on the merits of the case. This principle is applied to
assess whether the plaintiff’s claims appear to be grounded in federal law and to have a reasonable chance of
success should the case go to trial. INACIA uses its LLM to analyze the substance of the allegations and the legal
principles they invoke. This involves thoroughly examining the legal arguments, jurisprudence, and relevant
statutory laws. The LLM assesses the coherence of the allegations with existing legal norms and precedents,
providing an initial legal opinion on the case’s merit.
For the Fumus boni iuris analysis, we used an approach similar to the one used for the admissibility examination. We used the LLM as an intelligent agent capable of reasoning and interpreting legal documents. However,
instead of feeding the LLM with one of the admissibility criteria, we feed the LLM with the allegations extracted
in the pipeline task “allegations and requests” (cf. Section 4.3.2). The LLM then searches for information in case
documents and external databases to determine whether there is Fumus boni iuris.
The process for the Fumus boni iuris analysis is divided into two steps. In the first step, we feed the agent the
allegations extracted in the previous project stage and ask him to classify each allegation as grounded in law, not
grounded in law, or inconclusive. We use the reasoning and acting components of the ReAct framework [29] to
instruct the model to classify the allegations. The reasoning component is used to reason through the allegations
and plan the actions to be taken. The acting component executes the actions planned by the reasoning component,
which includes searching the case documents and the external databases. One of the external databases used in
this project stage is TCU’s selection of statutes and federal law. The model searches for information about the
laws invoked by the allegations in this database. The agent also searches for information about the allegations
in the TCU’s jurisprudence database. The model then classifies the allegations as grounded in law, not grounded
in law, or inconclusive.
The second step consists of producing a decision about the Fumus boni iuris of the case. The decision is based
on the classification of the allegations. For this step, we prompt the LLM to classify the allegations in three
classes: inconclusivo (inconclusive), afastada (not grounded in law), and configurada (grounded in law). We provide the model with the allegations and the classification of each allegation obtained in the first step. We then
ask the model to produce a decision about the Fumus boni iuris of the case. The model uses the classification of
the allegations to produce the decision. Before the decision is made, the model is instructed to produce a paragraph explaining the decision. The paragraph should explain the decision and the reasons for the decision. The
paragraph is included in the initial instruction document.

4.7 Recommendations
The INACIA pipeline concludes by generating a paragraph that, in this context, is called recommendations (i.e.,
the adjudication suggestions). The recommendations are a set of directions for the decision-making authority to
address the case. Since the auditor assigned the case bears full responsibility for the adjudication recommendations, INACIA only suggests directions for the auditor to consider but the auditor has the final say on whether
they accept the suggestion. This pipeline task is relatively straightforward and recasts the other outputs from
each task to construct a cohesive and coherent instruction document to be sent over to the panel of judges
Digit. Gov. Res. Pract., Vol. 6, No. 1, Article 6. Publication date: February 2025.

6:12 •

J. Pereira et al.

who will issue the final ruling on a case. To write adjudication recommendations, INACIA uses the following
components:
• The output from the admissibility examination, i.e., whether the case is admissible and the explanation of
such classification.
• The outcome of the periculum in mora and fumus boni iuris analyses, i.e., whether there is any danger in
delay and the case is likely to be successful based on its merits.
• The analysis of the case’s merits, with the details on claims, their relationship with the jurisprudence and
statutory law, and recommended courses of action.
Each of these inputs is then processed by the LLM, which had been previously instructed with guidelines
and examples of recommendations authored by experienced auditors. The LLM generates paragraphs for each
recommendations section, ensuring the final text is coherent and accurately reflects the proposals and analyses.
The end product is a structured document that is broken down into several sections, each on different aspects of
the case, such as the case information, decisions on admissibility, merits, and so on.
This modular construction of the final instruction document makes sense both from the legal and the computational sense. From the legal perspective, it allows human reviewers to parse out the document into smaller
chunks and use/correct them as they see fit. From the computational side, it means we do not have to reprocess
everything in later stages if we need a small correction in one of the earlier stages of INACIA. This approach
provides efficiency, especially in cases where, despite a potential flaw in one section, the rest of the information
remains valid and useful.
The recommendations task is thus a critical element of INACIA, marking the transition from analysis to actionable insights and ensuring that the outcomes of the case review process are communicated with clarity and
precision, consistent with the standards upheld by the TCU.

5

EXPERIMENTS

This section describes the experiments we conducted to evaluate the INACIA pipeline. Although INACIA has a
variety of project tasks, we only evaluated the recommendations task, which represents the system’s final and
most critical output. We first describe the dataset we used in the evaluation and then describe the evaluation
techniques we used. Finally, we present the results of the experiments.

5.1 Dataset Creation and Curation
A validation dataset was created to assess the quality of the analyses performed by INACIA. This dataset consists
of fully annotated cases for all information pieces extracted at each step of the pipeline. In total, we annotated
122 cases and 33 variables per case.7 Though the final evaluation is only performed with the recommendations
task, we tracked all other variables for intermediate outputs and for adjusting each INACIA module to output
the necessary results for the following module. The annotation of these cases consisted primarily of having
the language model extract each variable from the initial instruction of every case. Since we only worked with
disposed cases, we had the adjudication recommendation document (i.e., the initial instruction) available to us
when creating this validation dataset, which served then as the single source of validation information. The split
of extracted variables is (cf. Appendix A):
— 23 variables in the basic information module;
— 5 variables in the admissibility examination module;
— 2 variables in the periculum in mora module;
7 The selection of these cases followed criteria set up by the research team and TCU to better evaluate INACIA given the wide variety of

cases processed by the court: We blocked cases whose claims were violations of one procurement law, between 2019 and 2022, and which
contained periculum in mora analyses (such that we could recreate the complete analysis needed by TCU).
Digit. Gov. Res. Pract., Vol. 6, No. 1, Article 6. Publication date: February 2025.

Integrating Large Language Models in Brazilian Audit Courts: Opportunities and Challenges

• 6:13

— 1 variable in the fumus boni iuris module;
— 1 variable in the allegations and requests module;
— 1 variable in the recommendations module.
We instructed GPT-4 to extract all the information above from the initial instruction of each case to retrieve
the labels INACIA would have to predict based on case filing documents (i.e., the representação and supporting
documents).8 To guarantee that the validation dataset was being constructed correctly, we assigned one senior
researcher in our team (Ph.D. level) to manually review 30 randomly sampled cases for all variables to then
compare the researcher’s data extraction to that of GPT. GPT achieved 100% accuracy on this task, and we
confidently proceeded to ask it to code the 122 selected cases.
Although we collect and validate a wide range of information, including basic case details, claims, admissibility assessments, and so on, the results do not carry equal significance. We emphasize the evaluation of the
recommendations, as it is the last and most important step of the instruction process.

5.2 Evaluation
For evaluating the INACIA main output, we used the validation dataset described in the previous section. The
evaluation aims to compare the outcomes produced by the INACIA pipeline with the expected results previously
produced by human auditors. We only evaluated INACIA on the recommendations task (cf. Section 4.7), which is
the consolidation of outputs of all intermediate tasks (listed in Sections 4.3 to 4.6) to write the initial instruction
document.
The evaluation of recommendations could be done using term-matching metrics, such as BLEU, ROUGE, and
so on. However, evaluating free-form text generated by LLMs is a challenging task. While BLEU and ROUGE
are commonly used to evaluate text generation tasks, they have shown low correlation with human judgment
[6]. Approaches like GPTScore [9] and G-eval [15] have been proposed to address this issue by using LLMs to
evaluate the generated text. They have been shown to correlate more with human judgment than traditional
metrics when evaluating text summarization. However, these approaches are also unsuitable for evaluating the
text generated by the INACIA pipeline because the generated text is not a summary of a document. Instead, the
generated text is similar to what the auditor’s adjudication recommendations were.
The objective of this evaluation thus is to assess whether the recommendations produced by INACIA are consistent with those produced by a human auditor. Intuitively, we want to evaluate if the candidate text (INACIA)
contains the same elements as the reference text (human auditor). For this, we used the approach depicted in
Figure 6. First, we prompted OpenAI’s GPT-4 with the reference recommendations from the validation dataset,
asking it to compose a checklist of the elements that should be present in the recommendations (i.e., the Checklist Generation step). The result is a list of elements that should be present in the recommendations (i.e., the
evaluation checklist). Each element is a sentence with a Boolean statement (e.g., “The case is admissible”). We
then prompted the model with the candidate recommendations alongside the evaluation checklist and asked it
to evaluate if the text contained the checklist elements (i.e., the Checklist Evaluation step). Then, we can count
the number of checklist elements present in the candidate recommendations and use this number to evaluate
the quality of the extracted information. This produces a score that indicates how consistent the candidate recommendations are with the reference recommendations. For example, if the checklist contains 10 elements and
the candidate recommendations contain eight elements, then we can say that the candidate recommendations
are 80% consistent with the reference recommendations.
Figure 7 shows an example of a checklist of elements that should be present in the recommendations of an
example case. It was composed by OpenAI’s GPT-4 originally in Brazilian Portuguese and then translated to
English for this article. The checklist contains five elements that should be present in the candidate text. This
8 This process is exactly what TCU auditors do: from a set of documents filed by the plaintiff( i.e., the representação and supporting documents)

they draft the initial instruction.
Digit. Gov. Res. Pract., Vol. 6, No. 1, Article 6. Publication date: February 2025.

6:14 •

J. Pereira et al.

Fig. 6. The checklist approach used to evaluate the recommendations.

Fig. 7. Example of a checklist of elements that should be present in the recommendations. The checklist was composed by
OpenAI’s GPT-4 originally in Brazilian Portuguese and then translated to English for this article.

way, we can evaluate the quality of the recommendations by comparing the checklist elements with the candidate
recommendations. It is worth noting that the number of elements is not fixed and can vary from case to case.
We also used the candidate document to prompt the model to compose a checklist of the elements that should
be present in the candidate document. We then prompted the model with the reference document and asked it
to evaluate if it contained the checklist elements. Then, we can count the number of checklist elements present
in the reference document and use this number to evaluate the quality of the extracted information. This way,
we have two scores: the precision, which indicates how consistent the candidate document is with the reference
document, and the recall, which indicates how consistent the reference document is with the candidate document.
We then use the F1 score to evaluate the quality of the extracted information. The F1 score is the harmonic mean
of the precision and recall.
This approach has shown to have a good performance in assessing the quality of the extracted text in the TCU
context. To evaluate it, we asked an auditor to analyze five examples in which the score is too low (less than
0.3) and too high (more than 0.7). The auditor concluded that the examples with low scores were not consistent
with the reference text, and those with high scores were consistent with the reference text. This shows that
the approach is suitable for evaluating the quality of the extracted text in the TCU context. Yet, we evaluated
this approach on assessing the consistency of the automatically generated summary, so we could compare it
with GPTScore and G-eval. We used the SummEval Dataset [6] as a benchmark. The results shown in Table 1
Digit. Gov. Res. Pract., Vol. 6, No. 1, Article 6. Publication date: February 2025.

Integrating Large Language Models in Brazilian Audit Courts: Opportunities and Challenges

• 6:15

Table 1. Check-eval Results

Method

Consistency
ρ
τ

G-eval
0.507
GPTScore 0.449
check-eval 0.605

0.425
0.570

Relevance
ρ
τ

Coherence
ρ
τ

0.547 0.433 0.582
0.381
0.434
0.5028 0.4202 0.563

Fluency
ρ
τ

0.457
0.461

0.455
0.403
0.490

0.378
0.446

AVG
ρ

τ

0.514
0.417
0.623

0.418
0.493

Summary-level (ρ) Spearman and (τ ) Kendall tau correlations.

Table 2. Results of the Recommendations
Using the Checklist Approach

Mean
Std
Min
Max

Precision

Recall

F1

0.592
0.212
0.000
1.000

0.401
0.275
0.059
1.000

0.429
0.225
0.000
0.933

demonstrate that our approach correlates more with human judgment than GPTScore and G-eval on assessing
how consistent a summary is concerning its original text. It also has a higher correlation with human judgment,
considering the overall quality of the summary. This shows that our approach is suitable for evaluating the
quality of the automatically generated text.

6 RESULTS
Table 2 presents the results of evaluating the recommendations generated by the INACIA pipeline using the
checklist approach. This method assesses the alignment of the generated recommendations with the checklist of
elements derived from the reference text. The table shows the mean, standard deviation (Std), minimum (Min),
and maximum (Max) values for precision, recall, and the F1 score. These metrics provide insights into the consistency and completeness of the generated recommendations compared to the reference text. The average precision
score of 0.592 indicates that, on average, 59.2% of the checklist elements were found in the generated recommendations. This suggests a moderate level of accuracy in capturing the necessary elements in the recommendations.
The average recall score is 0.401, indicating that roughly 40.1% of the reference text elements were present in
the generated recommendations. This lower recall suggests that the generated recommendations do not capture
significant reference text elements. The average F1 score is 0.429, which reflects a balance between precision and
recall but suggests room for improvement in both aspects. The standard deviation values for precision (0.212),
recall (0.275), and F1 (0.225) show a certain degree of variability in the performance across different cases. Overall, these results suggest that while there are instances where the recommendations closely match the reference
text, there is a noticeable variation in the quality of the generated recommendations. The relatively lower recall
scores indicate a need for improvement in capturing all the necessary elements from the reference text in the
generated recommendations.
Although the INACIA pipeline does not always produce the expected results, it is possible to follow the reasoning of the INACIA pipeline to understand the decisions made by the agent. This helps the auditor to find the
evidence. For example, the INACIA pipeline may not classify the case as admissible regarding some criterion in
the admissibility examination. However, it is possible to follow the reasoning of the INACIA pipeline to understand why the case was not classified as admissible. Figure 8 shows an example of the reasoning produced by
INACIA for the admissibility examination considering the public interest criterion. The reasoning explains why
Digit. Gov. Res. Pract., Vol. 6, No. 1, Article 6. Publication date: February 2025.

6:16 •

J. Pereira et al.

Fig. 8. Example of the reasoning produced by INACIA for the admissibility examination considering the public interest
criterion.

the case was classified as admissible regarding the public interest criterion. This helps the auditor to understand
the decision made by INACIA and find the evidence that supports it.

7 DISCUSSION
7.1 Limitations
INACIA departs from common, simple uses of large language models in a few ways: (1) It uses long context
windows (and retrieval-augmented generation) techniques to extract information spread across multiple case
documents; (2) it requires the LLM to reason through many, often conflicting, documents and identify the most
important claims being made and present those to its user (e.g., evidence presented by plaintiff vs. jurisprudence); (3) it allows the LLM to search for external documents that are relevant to each analysis before generating
text for the user; (4) it produces a list of adjudication recommendations with little knowledge of what information takes precedence (e.g., is it the law or jurisprudence, is it a more recent or less recent piece of legislation, is it
one claim or all claims, etc.); and (5) its main product is free-form text with recommendations that are not easily
compared to purported ground truth retrieved from work done by TCU auditors. Naturally, thus, the system has
limitations due to the inability of LLMs to perform all the tasks above. Besides these inherent limitations, there
are practical limitations akin to large projects such as INACIA; e.g., the time constraints on developing each module and then integrating the whole application; the balance between developing a very advanced, cutting-edge
but also unstable technology; the gap in business, context-specific knowledge between the research team and
TCU auditors, and so on. Despite these limitations, we firmly believe INACIA has great potential to assist TCU
staff in their tasks and, therefore, add a lot of value to the TCU case processing structure.

7.2 Ethical Implications
Whenever artificial intelligence systems are being developed in real-world applications, one of the first concerns of decision-makers responsible for the system’s adoption is whether the models are biased or fair. While
acknowledging these as real issues in any AI system, we believe INACIA to be relatively shielded against such
concerns due to the nature of the case processing steps and information provided to the language models to complete each step in the INACIA pipeline. First, the complaints INACIA processes are not filed against individual
Digit. Gov. Res. Pract., Vol. 6, No. 1, Article 6. Publication date: February 2025.

Integrating Large Language Models in Brazilian Audit Courts: Opportunities and Challenges

• 6:17

defendants nor is any individual trait used in the analysis of case components. Second, the techniques used to
prompt INACIA are all grounding its answers onto information belonging to TCU’s knowledge base, such as jurisprudence, legal statutes and norms, and previous cases handled by the audit court. This structure ensures that
INACIA’s adjudication recommendations are based on established legal principles and precedents, significantly
mitigating the risks of bias.
Another important ethical consideration is the transparency, explainability, and accountability behind
INACIA’s decision-making process. Since the potential consequences of INACIA’s recommendations can be large,
it is imperative that the reasoning behind these decisions is clear and understandable. We believe this risk to be
limited since none of the decision factors used in INACIA prompts contains elements departing from current
adjudication practices at TCU. TCU staff has provided extensive support and auditing materials so that INACIA
could replicate as close as possible the work of a TCU auditor. Second, TCU auditors and eventually the court’s
judicial panel bear ultimate responsibility for any case decision. TCU has not removed, nor plans on removing,
any human oversight of INACIA’s outputs.9

8 CONCLUSIONS
In this article, we presented INACIA, an innovative system designed to integrate LLMs into the Brazilian Federal
Court of Accounts operational framework. Our experiments and analyses reveal that INACIA holds significant
potential to support the auditor in the audit process with greater speed and security in analyzing cases and
making decisions.
The utilization of LLMs for processing and analyzing case documents demonstrated a moderate level of accuracy in capturing essential elements and information from cases. The system’s ability to handle various stages of
case processing, from basic information extraction to admissibility examination, precautionary measure analysis,
legal plausibility assessment, and final recommendations generation, showcases its versatility and adaptability
to the complex requirements of legal proceedings.
Moving forward, we will focus on enhancing INACIA’s capabilities through continuous development and improvements. Besides, we will explore implementing an auditing system based on INACIA’s architecture, allowing
us to evaluate the system’s performance in a real-world setting. In conclusion, INACIA represents a significant
step forward in applying artificial intelligence in the legal domain. Its development and implementation in the
Brazilian audit courts can serve as a blueprint for similar initiatives globally.

9 There are other relatively minor risks that any new system carries, such as data security and privacy and job displacement, that are not
particular to INACIA. As far as data security and privacy go, INACIA is being built to be compatible with existing TCU systems without
adding any new risk. As to potential job displacement risks, TCU is precisely looking to replace tasks in its staff’s work assignments with
AI such that staff can shift their skills to other, more important tasks within TCU.

Digit. Gov. Res. Pract., Vol. 6, No. 1, Article 6. Publication date: February 2025.

6:18 •

J. Pereira et al.

APPENDIX
A LIST OF VARIABLES IN THE VALIDATION DATASET
Table 3. List of Variables in the Validation Dataset
Variable Name
numero_processo
info_uasg
info_author_name
info_author_doc
info_author_doc_type
info_author_doc_complement_type
info_author_doc_complement
info_case_summary
info_case_jurisdictional_unit
info_case_subject
info_case_dispute_validity
info_case_type
info_case_dispute_mode
info_case_dispute_criterion
info_case_dispute_value
info_case_dispute_value_type
info_case_status
info_case_status_ambiguous
info_procurement_id
info_procurement_phase
info_procurement_type
info_procurement_type_id
info_procurement_law
cautelar_perigo_demora
cautelar_perigo_demora_rev
cautelar_plausibilidade
admiss_legitimidade
admiss_linguagem
admiss_indicio
admiss_competencia
admiss_interesse_pub
alegacoes_txt
encaminhamentos_txt

Description
Basic Information Extraction
Individual case ID
Federal agency under investigation (unique ID)
Plaintiffś name
Plaintiffś document ID
Plaintiffś document type
Plaintiff’s additional document type information
Plaintiff’s additional document information
Case summary
Federal agency under investigation (name)
Case subject
Period during which procurement call remained open for proposals
TCU case classification
Procurement awarding mechanism
Procurement awarding mechanism criteria
Procurement contract value
Procurement contract value estimated or observed
Procurement status
Procurement status ambiguous
Procurement ID
Procurement stage
Procurement type
Procurement type ID
Law applicable to procurement call
Periculum in mora
Periculum in mora present (per TCU auditor evaluation)
Reverse periculum in mora present (per TCU auditor evaluation)
Fumus boni iuris
Fumus boni iuris (per TCU auditor evaluation)
Admissibility Examination
Legitimacy confirmation
Clear writing and language confirmation
Existence of evidence confirmation
Competency confirmation
Existence of public interest
Allegations and Requests
List of allegations
Recommendations
List of recommendations made by TCU auditor

REFERENCES
[1] Daron Acemoglu and David Autor. 2011. Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employment and earnings. In Handbook of
Labor Economics, Vol. 4. Elsevier, 1043–1171. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0169-7218(11)02410-5
[2] Thales Sales Almeida, Thiago Laitz, João Seródio, Luiz Henrique Bonifacio, Roberto Lotufo, and Rodrigo Nogueira. 2022. NeuralSearchX:
Serving a multi-billion-parameter reranker for multilingual metasearch at a low cost. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference
on Design of Experimental Search & Information REtrieval Systems (DESIRES ’22).
[3] Apache. [n. d.]. Apache Tika. Retrieved December 11, 2023 from https://tika.apache.org/
Digit. Gov. Res. Pract., Vol. 6, No. 1, Article 6. Publication date: February 2025.

Integrating Large Language Models in Brazilian Audit Courts: Opportunities and Challenges

• 6:19

[4] Ilias Chalkidis, Manos Fergadiotis, Prodromos Malakasiotis, Nikolaos Aletras, and Ion Androutsopoulos. 2020. LEGAL-BERT: The muppets straight out of law school. arXiv:2010.02559. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.02559
[5] Liting Chen, Lu Wang, Hang Dong, Yali Du, Jie Yan, Fangkai Yang, Shuang Li, Pu Zhao, Si Qin, Saravan Rajmohan, Qingwei Lin, and
Dongmei Zhang. 2023. Introspective tips: Large language model for in-context decision making. arXiv:2305.11598 [cs.AI]. Retrieved
from https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.11598
[6] Alexander R. Fabbri, Wojciech Kryściński, Bryan McCann, Caiming Xiong, Richard Socher, and Dragomir Radev. 2021. SummEval:
Re-evaluating summarization evaluation. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Ling. 9 (04 2021), 391–409. https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00373 https:
//direct.mit.edu/tacl/article-pdf/doi/10.1162/tacl_a_00373/1923949/tacl_a_00373.pdf
[7] Mathieu Fenniak. [n. d.]. PyPDF2. Retrieved December 11, 2023 from https://pypdf2.readthedocs.io/en/3.0.0/
[8] Claudio Ferraz and Frederico Finan. 2008. Exposing corrupt politicians: The effects of brazil’s publicly released audits on electoral
outcomes*. Quart. J. Econ. 123, 2 (05 2008), 703–745. https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.2008.123.2.703
[9] Jinlan Fu, See-Kiong Ng, Zhengbao Jiang, and Pengfei Liu. 2023. GPTScore: Evaluate as you desire. arXiv:2302.04166 [cs.CL]. Retrieved
from https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.04166
[10] Google. [n. d.]. Google Cloud Vision API. Retrieved December 11, 2023 from https://cloud.google.com/vision/
[11] Lars Hillebrand, Armin Berger, Tobias Deußer, Tim Dilmaghani, Mohamed Khaled, Bernd Kliem, Rüdiger Loitz, Maren Pielka, David
Leonhard, Christian Bauckhage, and Rafet Sifa. 2023. Improving zero-shot text matching for financial auditing with large language
models. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Document Engineering 2023 (DocEng ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY. https://doi.org/10.1145/3573128.3609344
[12] Katikapalli Subramanyam Kalyan. 2023. A survey of GPT-3 family large language models including ChatGPT and GPT-4. Natur. Lang.
Process. J. (2023), 100048. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nlp.2023.100048
[13] Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022. Large language models are zero-shot
reasoners. arXiv:2205.11916. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.11916
[14] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau
Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, Vol. 33, 9459–9474.
[15] Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. 2023. G-Eval: NLG evaluation using GPT-4 with
better human alignment. arXiv:2303.16634 [cs.CL]. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.16634
[16] Microsoft. [n. d.]. Microsoft Azure Form Recognizer. Retrieved December 12, 2023 from https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/
cognitive-services/form-recognizer/
[17] Rodrigo Nogueira, Zhiying Jiang, Ronak Pradeep, and Jimmy Lin. 2020. Document ranking with a pretrained sequence-to-sequence
model. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics, 708–718.
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.63
[18] Shounak Paul, Arpan Mandal, Pawan Goyal, and Saptarshi Ghosh. 2023. Pre-trained language models for the legal domain: A case
study on indian law. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law (ICAIL ’23). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, 187–196. https://doi.org/10.1145/3594536.3595165
[19] Jayr Pereira, Robson Fidalgo, Roberto Lotufo, and Rodrigo Nogueira. 2023. Visconde: Multi-document QA with GPT-3 and neural reranking. In Advances in Information Retrieval, Jaap Kamps, Lorraine Goeuriot, Fabio Crestani, Maria Maistro, Hideo Joho, Brian Davis, Cathal
Gurrin, Udo Kruschwitz, and Annalina Caputo (Eds.). Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, 534–543. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-03128238-6_44
[20] Thomson Reuters Institute. 2024. Generative AI and the Courts: Balancing Efficiency and Legal Obligations. Retrieved February 9, 2024
from https://www.thomsonreuters.com/en-us/posts/government/generative-ai-courts/
[21] Stephen E. Robertson, Steve Walker, Susan Jones, Micheline Hancock-Beaulieu, and Mike Gatford. 1994. Okapi at TREC-3. In Proceedings
of the Text Retrieval Conference (TREC ’94).
[22] Mehrdad Safaei and Justin Longo. 2023. The end of the policy analyst? Testing the capability of artificial intelligence to generate
plausible, persuasive, and useful policy analysis. Digit. Gov.: Res. Pract. (Aug. 2023). https://doi.org/10.1145/3604570
[23] Jaromir Savelka. 2023. Unlocking practical applications in legal domain: Evaluation of GPT for zero-shot semantic annotation of legal
texts. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law (ICAIL ’23). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3594536.3595161
[24] Murray Shanahan and Catherine Clarke. 2023. Evaluating large language model creativity from a literary perspective.
arXiv:2312.03746 [cs.CL]. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.03746
[25] Sohail Zafar Sipra, Muhammad Ihsan Ilahi, and Muhammad Imran Khan. 2024. From byte to bail: Assessing challenges and opportunities
in AI-driven criminal justice systems. Int. J. Hum. Soc. 4, 1 (2024), 184–195.
[26] Ray Smith. 2007. An overview of the tesseract OCR engine. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Document Analysis and
Recognition (ICDAR ’07), Vol. 2. IEEE, 629–633.
[27] Bruno W. Speck. 2011. Auditing institutions. Corruption and Democracy in Brazil: the Struggle for Accountability. 127–161.

Digit. Gov. Res. Pract., Vol. 6, No. 1, Article 6. Publication date: February 2025.

6:20 •

J. Pereira et al.

[28] Zhongxiang Sun. 2023. A short survey of viewing large language models in legal aspect. arXiv:2303.09136 [cs.CL]. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.09136
[29] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning
and acting in language models. arXiv:2210.03629 [cs.CL]. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03629

Received 30 December 2023; revised 26 February 2024; accepted 11 March 2024

Digit. Gov. Res. Pract., Vol. 6, No. 1, Article 6. Publication date: February 2025.

