Government Information Quarterly 39 (2022) 101660

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Government Information Quarterly
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/govinf

Artificial intelligence and speedy trial in the judiciary: Myth, reality or
need? A case study in the Brazilian Supreme Court (STF)
Weslei Gomes de Sousa a, *, Rafael Antunes Fidelis a, Paulo Henrique de Souza Bermejo a, Ana
Gersica da Silva Gonçalo b, Bruno de Souza Melo c
a
b
c

Faculty of Administration, Economics, Accounting and Public Management, University of Brasilia, DF, Brazil
Department of Information Technology, Integrated Colleges of the Educational Union of Central Plateau, DF, Brazil
Department of Information Technology, University Center of Brasilia, DF, Brazil

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Artificial intelligence
AI
Speedy trial
Justice delay
Artificial neural network
Natural language processing

Justice has dealt with procedural delays for decades, contributing to the rise of Artificial Intelligence (AI) to face
the problem. Therefore, it is essential to understand and analyze the implications of AI on speedy trial and how
AI can accelerate judicial processes. To this end, we conducted a case study at the Supreme Court of Brazil (STF),
collecting documents and conducting interviews for content analysis. The results consolidated a framework
model that combines resources and impacts of AI on the velocity of legal decisions demonstrating how and what
solutions contribute for judgment, pre-trial, and legal support. Therefore, it is believed that the gain in proce­
dural speed with AI is not just a myth. It can become a reality, but with limitations, because there is a long way
between the use of this technology in merely operational tasks and its use in complex activities such as evaluating
processes in their entirety. For these future challenges, we highlight research proposals for more effective
advances.

1. Introduction
For decades, the role of the Judiciary in several countries has been
considered precarious (Bielen, Peeters, Marneffe, & Vereeck, 2017;
French, 1933; Friesen & Information, 1984). In this context, one of the
most debated issues is the speedy trial, which is related to the system’s
ability to respond to the demand by the Judiciary at an appropriate time
(Ippoliti, Melcarne, & Ramello, 2014). Nevertheless, it has been
observed high costs, long delays for the completion of proceedings and,
consequently, procedural congestion (Gomes, Alves, & Silva, 2018).
Notwithstanding historical progress, delays and other problems in
public services persist and are addressed continuously with Information
and Communication Technology (ICT) (Dutta et al., 2019; Kum, Duncan,
& Stewart, 2009). In this sense, Artificial Intelligence (AI) has been
drawing attention (Chen, Guo, Gao, & Liang, 2019; de Sousa, De Melo,
De Souza, Farias, & Gomes, 2019; Kankanhalli, Charalabidis, & Mel­
louli, 2019; Levmore & Fagan, 2019). There are courts in several
countries that adhere to this technology (Alshahrani, Dennehy, &
Mäntymäki, 2021; Julius, 2018).
Zeleznikow (2017), for example, presents the online dispute

resolution systems (Online Dispute Resolution - ODR), which have
proved to be a good option for improving the speed. On the other hand,
Langbroek (2019) points out that AI does not appear to be the solution
for reducing procedural stock or for increasing speed. It only reports that
this technology can provide other types of benefits, such as improving
the assertiveness of the evidence.
Thus, there are divergent hypotheses, but without checking the im­
plications of AI on speedy trials and the factors associated with this
phenomenon. Therefore, it is not clear whether the expected evolution
occurs, which is corroborated by recent studies, which warn about the
importance of understanding what the implications of new technologies
for legal institutions are - with emphasis on AI (Andrade & Joia, 2012;
Gomes et al., 2018; Iriberri, 2015; Omoteso, 2012; Wallace, 2017).
In addition to the whole context involving AI and speedy trials, de
Sousa et al. (2019) draw attention to the need to investigate the use of AI
in specific areas of the public sector, which constitutes a promising
research opportunity. This study seeks to understand and analyze the
use of AI in the Judiciary, more specifically, the contributions and
limitations of this technology in the speedy trial.
To attend this objective, the Brazilian Superior Federal Court (STF)

* Corresponding author at: St. de Autarquias Norte Q 5, Centro Empresarial CNC, Torre A, Sala 1501, Asa Norte, Brasília, DF 70297-400, Brazil.
E-mail addresses: wesleigomes@gmail.com, weslei.gomes@mpt.mp.br (W.G. de Sousa).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2021.101660
Received 29 August 2020; Received in revised form 5 November 2021; Accepted 6 November 2021
Available online 3 December 2021
0740-624X/© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

W.G. de Sousa et al.

Government Information Quarterly 39 (2022) 101660

computer systems can perform tasks that require rational human ca­
pacity (Bačić, 2016; Mikalef et al., 2021). Between them, the Natural
language processing (NLP) technique stands out, which has proven
beneficial in judicial systems (Xiao, Hu, Liu, Tu, & Sun, 2021). NLP seeks
to “achieve language processing similar to human, so that a series of
tasks can be performed” (Liddy, 2001).
Despite providing facilities, the use of AI techniques faces challenges
(Alshahrani et al., 2021; Mikalef et al., 2021; Zuiderwijk, Chen, &
Salem, 2021). An obstacle in the Judiciary is the unstructured nature of
the data. Although the cases cover similar periods and the decisions
follow a general form, the judges are individualistic in the way they
present information (Alarie & Yoon, 2017). In addition, there is
disagreement in decisions about similar facts, which support different
legal precedents. Thus, AI-based solutions can produce inaccurate re­
sults (Rosenthal & Yoon, 2011).
Therefore, it is a mistake to think that instructing AI is an easy task,
as it can be challenging to deal with cases in which the determination of
a legal issue does not serve as an identifiable set of factors or when there
is insufficient data (Rosenthal & Yoon, 2011). A central point for dealing
with the problem is to transform unstructured data into structured data.
Acting in a scenario with these characteristics is laborious and re­
quires the participation of professionals from different areas. In addi­
tion, the misuse of these tools or the lack of knowledge about their
behavior can lead to the production of decisions contrary to legal
principles (Rosenthal & Yoon, 2011). Nevertheless, if used well, they can
generate economies of scale and increase the availability of services
(Zeleznikow, 2017).

was selected for a case study, considering the analysis perspectives
present in the literature. This study analyzes the STF’s experience from
the point of view of the implications of AI in the speedy trial. It also
presents how AI has contributed to accelerating legal proceedings and
obtaining a path for quantitative research that allows generalization.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 pre­
sents the main concepts related to AI and speedy trial. Section 3 de­
scribes the research methods and techniques applied, detailing the case
study and the literature review. Next, section 4 presents the results and
discussions. In this section, it discusses the framework of the impact of
AI on speedy trial. Finally, section 5 presents the conclusion, demon­
strating the limitations of this study, and potential future researches.
2. Literature review
2.1. Juridical system and speedy trial
The Judiciary is responsible for compliance with the laws. Hence, it
performs five functions: Administrative, Enforceable, Declaratory,
Conciliatory, and Judicative. The effectiveness of applying these func­
tions is continuously questioned due to problems related to speedy trial
(Whalen-bridge, 2019).
Speed is related to the time between the filing or termination and
trial of a case. It addresses variables of time, productivity, and proce­
dural congestion (Mery, 2015; Staats, Bowler, Hiskey, Staats, & Thiskey,
2016; Viechnicki & Eggers, 2017). In Brazil, the congestion issue can be
considered one of the main challenges for the Brazilian judicial system.
Its congestion rate is one of the most worrying in the world, as it is
usually high and shows the status of the provision of legal services
concerning the time of grant of the actual guarantee of the right (CNJ,
2018b). Voigt (2016) explains that this problem occurs because the
number of incoming cases is higher than the outcoming. To understand
this procedure, Vereeck and Muhl (2000) break the procedural progress
into four periods: (i) negotiation between the parties before judiciali­
zation; (ii) preparation of the trial; (iii) wait between the end of (ii) and
the beginning of (iv); and (iv) trial.
These periods are negatively affected by the determinants of proce­
dural delay, namely (Zuckerman, 1999):

2.3. Artificial intelligence and its impacts in the justice system
For complex domains, such as the judicial domain, the impacts of AI
technologies are considerable (Carneiro, Novais, Andrade, Zeleznikow,
& Neves, 2014; Tomsett et al., 2020). The positive impacts of AI
implementation can be examined by several analysis perspectives, such
as accessibility, agility, consistency, efficiency, impartiality, precision,
support, and transparency of legal activities (Alarie, Niblett, & Yoon,
2018; Carneiro et al., 2014; Kazim & Koshiyama, 2021; Krupiy, 2020;
Mowbray, Chung, & Greenleaf, 2020; Nakad-weststrate, Jongbloed, &
Salem, 2015; Nakad-Weststrate, Jongbloed, van den Herik, & Salem,
2015; Ojiako, Chipulu, Marshall, & Williams, 2018a; Xiao et al., 2021;
Zeleznikow, 2002a).
When AI is appropriately applied, benefits to the judicial system can
be observed. On the other hand, when the application of AI occurs in the
wrong way, it naturally can generate negative impacts. This is justified
because AI has not yet achieved its full potentials, such as jurisprudence
applications and decision models (Nakad-weststrate, Jongbloed, &
Salem, 2015; Nakad-Weststrate, Jongbloed, van den Herik, & Salem,
2015; Rodrigues, 2020). In many cases, the application of complex
technologies such as AI results in technocratic governance, in other
words, technical solutions to solve complex social problems (Janssen &
Kuk, 2016). Nonetheless, each legal case is unique and challenging to
decide, even for the most experienced lawyers and judges (Alarie et al.,
2018; Ojiako et al., 2018a; Weber, 1999). Thus, not all problems in the
legal system can be solved by AI, since these tools technologies are
shaped by a history of hundreds or thousands of court decisions and can
generate inaccurate decisions (Alarie et al., 2018).
Therefore, AI cannot yet offer legal advice like professionals (Alarie
et al., 2018; Wachter, Mittelstadt, & Russell, 2021). Not only that, there
are other not computed information and values due to the delimitation
of AI information access (Alarie et al., 2018; Ojiako et al., 2018a; Weber,
1999). The negative impacts of AI implementation can also be examined
by several analysis perspectives, such as infeasibility, rigidity,

i) High demand (Oliveira, 2017; Santos & Melo, 2017): the exces­
sive number of lawsuits being filed in Court is one of the main
factors causing delays. The high incidence of repetitive cases
stands out.
ii) Structural deficiencies (Gonçalves, 2008; Sadek, 2010): derived
from the courts’ organizational structure and use of resources.
iii) Inadequate legislation (Manzi, 2004): the excess of laws makes it
challenging to know which ones are in force and if the laws are
repeated or contradictory. Even the language of the laws is
complex to understand.
iv) Excessive formalism (Santos & Melo, 2017): requirement of many
forms, documents, certificates, protocols, and record.
Given the determinants of delay, there is an attempt to use AI to
address the problems.
2.2. Artificial intelligence
AI has been mentioned since 1940 (Bush, 1945). In 1956, the term
was coined in a workshop in the USA (Tecuci, 2012). In the 1970s, the
legal community became interested in AI (Bobrow & Raphael, 1974;
Magalhães, 2005; Nilsson, 1971; Waterman & Newell, 1971). In this
research, AI represents a set of techniques and tools developed so that

2

W.G. de Sousa et al.

Government Information Quarterly 39 (2022) 101660

Table 1
Perspectives for analyzing AI applications on the judiciary.
Perspectives

Positive impacts

Negative impacts

References

Accessibility or
infeasibility

Increased access to justice due to the possible
faster release of resources, to meet a greater
demand.
Reduction of work execution time, allowing
activities that would normally take hours to be
performed in just a few minutes.

Elitization or inconstancy of access to justice due to the
necessity of digital resources to handle the information.

(Carneiro et al., 2014) and (Alarie et al.,
2018) and (Ojiako et al., 2018a) and (Kazim
& Koshiyama, 2021)
(Nakad-Weststrate et al., 2015) and (Alarie
et al., 2018)

Agility or rigidity

Consistency or
inconsistency
Efficiency or
inefficiency
Impartiality or
bias
Precision or
imprecision

Greater security in decision-making by
systematizing knowledge.
Reduction of legal operation costs due to the
computerization of activities.
Distancing from specific trends or directions
due to the absence of human values in the
tools.
Reduction of human error in legal proceedings
due to more accurate tool operations.

Increased bureaucracy or insignificant reduction of work
execution time due to the inclusion of one more step in the
judicial processes. In general, validation by humans is still
required.
Imprecision in a decision model due to misapplication of
variables, patterns, or inferences.
High cost of AI implementation and low immediate financial
return.
Persistence of human bias, such as prejudice and
discrimination, due to biased data.
Development imprecision, operation failures, and tool
dependency.

Support or
objection

Functionalities to support legal decisions.

Disagreement or objection in the use of AI.

Transparency or
privacy gaps

Allow information to be readily available and
easily accessible.

Privacy and information security breaches due to data
availability.

inconsistency, inefficiency, bias, imprecision, objection, and privacy of
legal activities (Alarie et al., 2018; Carneiro et al., 2014; Kazim &
Koshiyama, 2021; Krupiy, 2020; Mowbray et al., 2020; NakadWeststrate et al., 2015; Ojiako et al., 2018a; Xiao et al., 2021; Zelezni­
kow, 2002a). Table 1 describes the perspectives for analyzing the pos­
itive and negative impacts of AI presented in the literature.
Therefore, the limitations of AI reinforce the importance of data
governance for greater compliance with legal and ethical requirements
(Janssen, Brous, Estevez, Barbosa, & Janowski, 2020; Janssen & Kuk,
2016; Taeihagh, 2021). In addition to the requisites of data accuracy,
integrity, and privacy, ethical concerns related to the governance of AI
technologies are connected to trust, transparency, and justice (Alshah­
rani et al., 2021). In this sense, the analysis perspectives presented here
and the ethical issues because of current AI limitations also impact the
speedy trial.

(Zeleznikow, 2002a) and (Carneiro et al.,
2014) and (Nakad-Weststrate et al., 2015)
(Zeleznikow, 2002a) and (Carneiro et al.,
2014)
(Nakad-Weststrate et al., 2015) and (Ojiako
et al., 2018a) and (Kazim & Koshiyama,
2021)
(Nakad-weststrate, Jongbloed, & Salem,
2015, Nakad-Weststrate, Jongbloed, van
den Herik, & Salem, 2015) and (Krupiy,
2020)
(Zeleznikow, 2002a) and (Carneiro et al.,
2014) and (Mowbray et al., 2020) and (Xiao
et al., 2021)
(Zeleznikow, 2002a) and (Ojiako et al.,
2018a)

production time of procedural parts. Nakad-weststrate, Jongbloed, &
Salem, 2015, Nakad-Weststrate, Jongbloed, van den Herik, & Salem,
2015 deal with the possibility of creating a robot judge.
Despite the brief concepts and examples presented, given the
divergence between authors, AI’s limits and impact on legal activities
are unclear (Langbroek, 2019; Zeleznikow, 2017). It is believed that
analyzing the factors of speedy trial that are related to AI, based on the
literature, and verifying the implications of this technology on speedy
trial, means, in the theoretical field, to contribute with the identification
of elements that can support the verification of speed and, in the prac­
tical area, assist professionals in maximizing the use of AI to improve
speedy trial and to reduce procedural stock (Dakolias, 1999; Rover,
2010).
3. Research method
The research presents a qualitative approach and uses the case study
technique (Godoy, 1995; Soy, 1997; Yin, 1984). The logic is inductive
since starting from particular facts intended to reach a general conclu­
sion (Medeiros, 2006). It is descriptive because it seeks to describe
characteristics of a specific phenomenon (Vergara, 1998) and explor­
atory because it can support the construction of a theory in a not very
sedimented field of knowledge, it has a small sample and qualitative
data analysis (Baškarada, 2014; Gil, 1999; Naresh, 2001). The paradigm
is functionalist, as it seeks the solution to practical problems (Burrel &
Morgan, 1979).
Fig. 1 presents the procedures defined to achieve the purpose of this
study. We describe the details of which below.

2.4. Artificial intelligence and speedy trial
Several studies report the use of AI to solve justice problems with an
emphasis on dealing with issues related to speedy trial (Arditi & Pulket,
2010; Carneiro et al., 2014; Castell, 2018; CNJ, 2018; Julius, 2018;
Levmore & Fagan, 2019; Mahfouz & Kandil, 2012; Nakad-weststrate,
Jongbloed, & Salem, 2015; Nakad-Weststrate, Jongbloed, van den
Herik, & Salem, 2015; Netten, Van Braak, Choenni, & Leeuw, 2016;
Zeleznikow, 2002b; Zeleznikow, 2017). Thus, given the full potential of
AI, Chun (2008) presented a model for processing forms that aim to
improve speed. In that same sense, Raja, Malmathanraj, and Arun
(2012) describe a way to retrieve and classify documents to deliver an
ideal set of documents through semantic analysis, which is often very
useful for searching previous cases (Langbroek, 2019).
Instead, Gupta and Mago (2013) deal with the automatic choice of
services according to citizens’ needs. In the Conciliating function, ODRs
are an essential tool, as they use AI to provide a way of resolving disputes
(Ojiako et al., 2018a; Ojiako, Chipulu, Marshall, & Williams, 2018b).
Regarding the Judiciary function, Maule, Schacher, and Gallup (2002)
propose an AI-based knowledge management system to help integrate
data for the analysis of decision-making scenarios to improve the

3.1. Literature review and definition OF the research problem
The first activity presented in Fig. 1 refers to the literature review
and the definition OF the research problem. Therefore, the literature
review contributes to knowing the perspectives of analyses to under­
stand the impacts of AI technologies on the judicial sector and provides
the foundation for building the framework for this research. We perform
the analysis in four phases: identification, screening, eligibility, and

3

W.G. de Sousa et al.

Government Information Quarterly 39 (2022) 101660

1. Literature
review and
definition of
the research
problem

2. Selection of
the case study
and unit of
analysis

3. Collection of
the case study
information

4. Organization
and analysis of
information

5. Inferences,
theoretical
correlations
and
conclusions

6. Framework
design and
conclusion of
writing

Fig. 1. Research procedures.

inclusion, in which the exclusion criteria (Textbox 1) and inclusion
(Textbox 2) are taken into account.

Textbox 1: Exclusion criteria.
e.i) Focus on the private sector or not focused on justice; *
e.ii) Essentially technical publications; *
e.iii) Date of publication before 01/01/1970.
* The criteria e.i and e.ii are not mutually exclusive.

Textbox 2: Inclusion criteria.
i.i) Academic or commercial research focusing on the adoption of AI to treat speedy trial;
i.ii) Terms related to AI and speedy trial in accordance with what was defined by de Sousa et al. (2019) and also the terms backlog; judicial; and
delay. Used after research to eliminate misunderstandings. AI, for example, is an acronym commonly used for autopsy image (Okuda, Shiotani,
Sakamoto, & Kobayashi, 2013).
i.iii) The time frame was from 01/01/1970, when AI started to be applied to different areas of knowledge (Bobrow & Raphael, 1974; Nilsson,
1971; Waterman & Newell, 1971), at 31/07/2019, date of obtaining information for the research.

3.3. Collection, organization, and analysis of the case study information

We conduct the identification phase between August 15 and 30,
2019, based on journals Science Direct and Capes and the Google
Scholar tool, with the following arguments: (“dispute resolution” OR
“judicial” OR “court” OR “judge”) AND (“artificial intelligence” OR
“intelligent information system” OR “intelligent application” OR (“court
backlog” OR “court delay”). Capes: restricted to Law. Science Direct: we
implemented logical structure in parts. Google Scholar: the option to
include patents and citations was excluded, with classification by date.
The samples were stored in the Mendeley Reference Management Soft­
ware®, and we removed the duplicates. From there, we proceeded with
the steps of eligibility and inclusion for application of the criteria,
resulting in 135 publications, which started to compose the work.

The collection of information sought to identify the characteristics
and results of the application through documentary research combined
with semi-structured interviews (de Marconi & Lakatos, 2017; de Mar­
tins & Theóphilo, 2016). We carried out these procedures from the
perspective of three categories of analysis: Technical, Negotiation, and
Result (Andersen & Danziger, 1995; Bardin, 2016; Mairiza, Zowghi, &
Nurmuliani, 2010; Wilmot, 2007).
In order to have a systematic view of the problem, we selected three
people who could contribute to the case study, each with different
competencies and attributions, with the following characteristics:
• Interviewee 1: Information Technology Manager. Primary respon­
sible for the analyzed AI tool. Has business, management, and
technical knowledge.
• Interviewee 2: Systems Analyst. The responsible for the analyzed AI
tool. Knows technical and performance details of the application.
• Interviewee 3: Legal analyst. Legal professional with knowledge
about the routines and rules of the analyzed body.

3.2. Selection of the case study and unit of analysis
For the case study, an organization of the Judiciary was sought, with
an application based on AI to improve speedy trial, willing to make
available people and materials for data collection, and meet the critic
case selection Flyvbjerg (2001). Thus, we chose the Federal Supreme
Court of Brazil (STF). With the Victor system, the Agency meets all re­
quirements and has aroused interest in the results of the application
(Dissony et al., 2018; Oliveira & Costa, 2019; Orlando, 2018; Tepedino
& Silva, 2019).
The STF is the highest level of the Brazilian Judiciary System. Its
main mission is to uphold the Constitution, the country’s fundamental
and supreme law, thus ensuring the functioning of democracy. The ac­
tions performed at the STF are resonated throughout the legal system
(da Costa, 2006).

The choice of professionals for the interviews was made based on the
necessity of information related to the research objectives. Thus, to
provide a holistic analysis, it included people with management, tech­
nical and juridical perspectives. This action was necessary for the ac­
curate compression of the case study, including enabling the
understanding of the limitations of the AI application in the STF.
Thus, the collection was divided into three parts:

4

W.G. de Sousa et al.

Government Information Quarterly 39 (2022) 101660

4. Results and discussion

i) Characterization of the problem: we attempted to understand the
reasons and decision process that led the institution to adopt AI to
support speedy trial (Subsections 3.1 and 3.2). Thus, it is possible
to verify the relationship between AI and speedy trial, confront
the observations with some theoretical elements, and guide the
verification of the scope of the expected results.
ii) The business context of the AI solution: we sought to verify the
results generated by the tool in speedy trial and the institution’s
involvement in establishing the instrument and conducting a
holistic analysis of the effects of AI on speed. Therefore, in
addition to the time, we assessed its use’s budgetary, personnel,
efficiency, and effectiveness (Subsections 3.3 and 3.4).
iii) Technical characterization of the AI solution: considering that AI
is an IT tool and that technical aspects can influence, mainly, in
terms of time and quality of results, we sought to briefly check the
technical aspects of the solution (Subsection 3.1.2). This infor­
mation is essential to establish a framework that allows, in the
future, to verify whether changes in speedy trial by the use of AI
had a technological influence.

4.1. The federal supreme court and the adoption of technologies based on
AI
The institution chosen for the case study was the Federal Supreme
Court (STF), the highest Court in the hierarchy of the Brazilian Judiciary
system. It is responsible for ensuring that the legal rules follow the
dictates of the Brazilian Constitution (Filho, 2016).
Among its main attributions is to judge direct actions of unconsti­
tutionality and declaratory actions of the constitutionality of laws, as
well as the plea of noncompliance with a fundamental precept arising
from the Constitution itself and extradition requested by foreign states
(Brasil., 1988). Since 2018, the STF traces, in its strategic planning, the
search for greater celerity of the jurisdictional provision (Brasil, 2020).
In general, the procedural flow at the STF occurs in the stages repre­
sented in Fig. 2.
The proceedings begin with the receipt of cases, which may be filed
directly with the STF or come from other courts or tribunals. The next
step is the speedy trial. The analysis starts with the Judicial Secretariat,
which forwards the case to the presidency or distribution to the judges.
In the case of preference for the presidency or internal or external ap­
peals, a panel may decide the case. The action of the STF ends with the
discharge to the file, determining a jurisprudence, or sending it to
another lower court (Supremo Tribunal Federal, 2019).
The jurisdiction of the STF is broad (CNJ, 2018b); however, the
Judiciary function is primarily exercised, with emphasis on extraordi­
nary appeals (EA), which apply to cases decided in a trial court or
appellate Court. When the appealed decision violates provisions of the
Constitution and has far-reaching repercussions (GR), that is, the issue
goes beyond individual interests. Given the high procedural demand and
the rise of AI, the body decided to enjoy the technological opportunity
(Santos & Melo, 2017).

APPENDIX A contains the indexation resulting from this analysis.
Thus, throughout this research, references to the analyzed content are
made by the prefix CI concatenated with a number in the following
format: CIn.
3.4. Inferences, theoretical correlations, and conclusions
We proceeded with content analysis from the table of contents
(APPENDIX A), which allowed us to identify the elements representing
concepts, specifications, ideas, and results to present the knowledge
produced following the research outcomes (Bardin, 2016). In addition to
the issue of speed, the impact of AI in the field of efficiency and effec­
tiveness was also verified. We based the selection of content excerpts on
the thematic relevance criterion (Guimarães & Sales, 1997).

4.1.1. Impact factors on speedy trial and the justification for using the AI in
the STF
The Supreme Court is in first place in terms of speed, among the
different instances of the Judiciary. However, in 2017, 2919 cases lasted
a decade or more (Fig. 3). To explain the relative excellent performance,
Respondent 2 stated that, in the STF, “problems related to speed are
generated only by high demand and not by structural deficiencies.”
Interviewee 2 explained that the demands need to be analyzed by the
lower courts before reaching the STF. Still, this activity “(...) is done in a
precarious way (...), which is a consequence of a structural problem of
justice, which makes a large number of cases reach the Supreme Court”.

3.5. Framework design and conclusion of writing
It refers to the paper’s conclusion, demonstrating the possibilities of
AI in speedy trial in the judicial system. Also presented are complements
and refinements made due to new elements that emerged during the
research.

Fig. 2. Proceedings at the STF.
5

W.G. de Sousa et al.

Government Information Quarterly 39 (2022) 101660

Fig. 3. Time of the cases pending in the STF in 2017.

High demand is the main impact on speed and results in a high
congestion rate, 27.6% in 2017, justifying the adoption of technologies
to deal with the problem (CNJ, 2018b). Besides, the justification for
using AI in the STF involves more significant concern due to the full
scope of issues of general repercussions (Júnior, 2018).

thousand/year) (CI5).
Victor’s routines are divided into three libraries of software, struc­
tured in microservices (CI5). “A library is heavier and more complex, as
it deals with the application of Optical Character Recognition (OCR).
The others, responsible for separating the pleadings and analyzing the
subjects, have light and fast functioning” (Interviewee 2). With this ar­
chitecture, several information systems can make individual use of re­
sources (CI4).

4.1.2. Characterization of the AI solution of STF
For the creation of the AI solution in the STF, named Victor, in 2018,
the Decentralized Execution Term (TED) no. 1 was established with the
University of Brasília (UnB) for $304,819.36 (US dollar) (CI7). The
development foresees five stages and is taking place (11/2019). There­
fore, productivity data is obtained from real data tests. Interviewee 2
explained that “the STF informs the requirements, and UnB specifies and
develops the solution. They deliver the application to the Court’s team,
which only integrates it into the body’s environment”.
The technique used is Natural Language Processing (NLP), which
required the “(...) development of a system composed of machine
learning algorithms for automating the textual analysis of lawsuits”
(CI3), through Artificial Neural Networks (ANN)—justified by the type
of data and the high volume of Extraordinary Appeals (EA) (80

4.2. Definition of routines for automation by the AI in the STF
The Judiciary function is the most significant and costly for the Su­
preme Court. Therefore, we sought to automate tasks related to this
function, represented in Fig. 4 (CI8).
The stages of processing (Fig. 4) are explained below:
i) Initial processing: encompasses the receipt and assessment of the
process before judgment. It has the Screening activity, which
prevents cases with obstacles or dealing with GR issues from

Fig. 4. Stages of the court proceeding in STF and its AI application.
6

W.G. de Sousa et al.

Government Information Quarterly 39 (2022) 101660

reaching the offices. At this stage, the application of the Victor
system stands out.
ii) Judgment: it takes place within the offices; the decisions identify
it.
iii) Final processing: the last milestone of the process represents the
moment when all the activities of a process terminate. When
obstructed, the process is returned to its origin.

12,000
60%
701 GR subjects

8,000
40%
29 GR subjects

Fig.6. Cases by subjects with GR recognized in the STF.

Interviewee 1 stated that “when it was identified what AI could solve,
the exclusion of cases involving justice’ offices was placed as a criterion,
to avoid political impact. The screening was chosen because we under­
stood that it was the best scenario to apply AI. The problem is that each
office has a different direction; it would be complicated to standardize a
solution”.
This decision is in line with that reported by Rosenthal and Yoon
(2011). They argue that the judges’ approaches and contextualized
writing can make identifying patterns within texts and between docu­
ments difficult. Consequently, AI can generate inaccurate results. In this
way, all step (ii) was excluded. Considering that Final Processing (iii)
deals only with the forwarding of cases, it was defined that the screening
would be the routine to be automated. Thus, as it represents 82.3% of
the demand, the procedural class to be dealt with would be EA. It is
emphasized that the screening can significantly influence the speed due
to the possibility of early return to the courts of origin of cases that deal
with GR subjects judged (Tartuce, 2019).
Hence, the solution was concentrated on the most expressive sub­
jects. The team focused on “29 subjects, representing 40% of all STF
demand related to recognized GR cases” (Interviewee 1). To feasible the
screening, the professionals reported that other tasks were implemented
to be performed by machines. Therefore, the solution architecture
separated the routines into two contexts, as described below (Fig. 5):

subject, and 20 thousand are returned for dealing with issues already
judged. In total, there are 730 recognized GR subjects (CI16), with only
29 concentrating 40% (8 thousand) of all cases associated with known
GR subjects (Fig. 6).
Using AI in the screening for recognition of GR, about 8 thousand
cases can be returned to the origins of the machine (Fig. 6). Thus, there
will be a balance of 12 thousand to be analyzed manually. We observed
that 40% (Fig. 6) of the cases correspond to only 3.1% of the recognized
subjects. This is because, as reported by Interviewee 2, “there is a certain
difficulty in training AI in all subjects,” indicates that professionals do
not consider machine training to be so simple. As reported by Rosenthal
and Yoon (2011), such difficulty comes from the high randomness of the
procedural information or because there are subjects with few samples,
which is based on what Reiling (2006) observed, because the EAs have a
Judicial character and, for the author, this is the most random function,
alongside the Conciliator (Fig. 7).
Despite the difficulties, considering that each process requires 11 min
of manual analysis for screening and that the AI processing time is
negligible and does not require the participation of people, some numbers
are reached that represent benefits (Frame 1). The calculations show that,
in one year, the AI generates savings of 1467 h of work and a reduction in
the processing time of the cases. That confirms what was recorded in the
CI4 when prospecting that “among the prognoses of what may occur,
because of ongoing research, it is worth noting the reduction in processing
time, due to the automation of technical procedures”.

i) Pleading: support routines capable of being used by different sys­
tems. There is the OCR for character recognition of text, images, and
the recognition of pleadings and process classification.
ii) Global repercussion (GR): specific for the treatment of Extraordinary
Appeals for the Recognition of subjects and GR Screening.

Frame 1. Time for manual analysis and estimated time saved with the
use of AI in screening for ER in STF.
Despite the presumed time gain, it is essential to know that, until
2018, the decisions taken by Victor had an accuracy of 85%, that is, they
presented a 15% chance of the cases being treated in a wrong way,
which, consequently, could harm the right of some citizens (CI1).
Considering that there is no room for error in the legal procedure, it is
observed that a verification step in the screening could be added, which
would be the approval of the AI decision by a professional. Thus, in the
event of carrying out this additional task, it is impossible to state that the
estimated time with the use of AI would be precisely that shown in
Frame 1.
However, in the scenario presented, without human participation, it
is observed in Frame 2 that AI can save 280 days of work. Thus, if we
consider that there are approximately 255 working days in a year and

With the automation of the five tasks presented in Fig. 4, it was found
that the other functions of justice became potential beneficiaries in
addition to the Judiciary. Therefore, the system can be used in lower
instances so that there is a pre-screening to correct a systemic structural
problem, as reported in Section 2.
4.3. Assessment of the systemic impact of AI on speedy trial
According to Interviewee 1, of the 80 thousand EA cases received
annually, 20 thousand are returned to their origins due to obstacles.
Thus, 60 thousand are analyzed in the screening, of which the STF re­
ceives 40 thousand to proceed generally for dealing with a new GR

Fig. 5. Automated procedures using AI implemented at the STF for speedy trial.
* The functions within each context do not occur sequentially.
7

W.G. de Sousa et al.

Government Information Quarterly 39 (2022) 101660

20,000
25%
40,000
50%
12,000
15%
8,000
10%
General repercussion: processes accepted because they deal with a new subject
General repercussion: processes returned by the AI because they deal with judged subject
General repercussion: processes returned manually because they deal with a subject that has been judged
or awaiting judgment
Cases returned due to obstacles
Fig. 7. Panorama of EA admissibility in the STF.

that there are intermittences, it is possible to conclude that about two
professionals are exempt from activities.
Frame 2.

provided for in the TED (CI7), it is estimated that the return on invest­
ment may occur in 3 years. The values presented were converted from
Real currency to Dollars in 2019, considering the exchange rate at that
time. Therefore, assuming that this is a permanent solution, the longterm economy confirms what was already predicted by Kling (1989)
when reporting on the potential of AI to contribute to a more efficient
legal system.

Estimated working days effectively saved with AI.

Among the systemic effects of AI is the possibility of budgetary and
personnel gains. Interviewee 1 said, “financially it is impactful because
the public servant is expensive, so he should work in more valuable
activities. When we manage to eliminate part of the work of a team with
thirty people, this generates savings in the long run”.
Frame 3.

4.4. Analysis of AI use in the justice speedy trial

Budgetary results using AI.

The case study based on AI solution of STF provides concrete insight
into the theories presented in the literature. Therefore, Fig. 8 represents
a consolidated view of the AI resources identified in the research with

The results of Frame 3 show that AI generates about $ 106,228.43 in
annual budget savings. If we consider the amount of $ 309,934.96
8

W.G. de Sousa et al.

Government Information Quarterly 39 (2022) 101660

Consolidated view of AI applied resources by segment in Justice

Direct

1. Judgment
a) Jurisprudential consultation (Chun, 2008) and (CI4)
b) Analysis of scenarios (Maule, Schacher & Gallup, 2002)

Indirect/Direct

2. Pre-trial
a) Result predictor (Kling, 1989)
b) Service screening (Gupta & Mago, 2013)
c) Online Dispute Resolution (ODR) (Zeleznikow, 2010) and (Ojiako et al., 2018b)
d) Screening of cases (CI4)
3. Support

Indirect

Impact on speedy trial

c) Automatic decision making (Nakad-weststrate et al., 2015)

a) Digitization of legal texts (CI1/CI2/CI3)
b) Classification of procedural documents (Raja, Malmathanraj & Arun, 2012) e
(CI1/CI2/CI4)
c) Procedural consultation (CI4)

Fig. 8. Framework with consolidated representation of the impact of AI on speedy trial.

the STF and the literature review, classified by the type of impact on
speedy trial. This vision is essential for academics and practitioners,
given that the framework shows what and how solutions contribute to
speeding up legal proceedings, as explained below:

ii) Service screening: seeks to guide the citizen to the most appro­
priate service, as needed.
iii) Online Dispute Resolution (ODR): allows for the negotiation and
prior resolution of disputes.
iv) Process screening: checks procedural obstacles so that only cases
not treated automatically come to manual analysis.

1. Judging Segment: automation of routines for analyzing process in­
formation and decision making. They can directly impact speed.
They cover:

3. Support Segment: routines that provide support for pre-trial and trial
activities and can also support administrative activities. They can
indirectly impact the speedy trial. They cover:

i) Jurisprudential consultation (Chun, 2008 and CI4): identifies
similar lawsuits and proposes decisions based on precedents.
ii) Scenario analysis (Maule et al., 2002): integrates quantitative
data and qualitative information to facilitate decision making.
iii) Automatic decision making (Nakad-weststrate, Jongbloed, &
Salem, 2015; Nakad-Weststrate, Jongbloed, van den Herik, &
Salem, 2015): performs functions similar to analysts and judges.
Evaluates the process and present a verdict.

i) Digitization of legal texts: it identifies and extracts texts from
cases in image format and stores them in text format.
ii) Classification of procedural documents: identify patterns in the
cases’ texts, divide them, and classify them in procedural
documents.
iii) Procedural consultation: performs indexing and optimizes the
search for content of cases.

2. Pre-judgment segment: automation of routines that support or act in
the previous resolution of cases or reject cases that have obstacles.
They can, directly and indirectly, impact speed. They cover:

In the Judgment segment, some solutions can generate the most
significant divergences in the legal field. As reported by professionals
and diagnosed by Alarie and Yoon (2017) and Langbroek (2019), in the
legal context, there are different understandings between judges, which
makes it challenging to define a mode of operation for the machine

i) Outcome predictor: predicts the outcome of the dispute and
suggests an agreement to prevent judicialization.
9

W.G. de Sousa et al.

Government Information Quarterly 39 (2022) 101660

which works based on statistics. This fact hinders data governance,
presented in the literature as an essential element for ethical issues
(Alshahrani et al., 2021; Janssen et al., 2020; Taeihagh, 2021).
However, these resources have been improved, making them
increasingly used (Nakad-weststrate, Jongbloed, & Salem, 2015, NakadWeststrate, Jongbloed, van den Herik, & Salem, 2015). In this
perspective, the Scenario Analysis and the Jurisprudential Consultation
demonstrate the capacity to boost the speed of the processing of cases,
respectively, through the prospecting of situations and the presentation
of previous cases, which facilitates decision making (Lee, 1998).
Another important feature is automatic decision-making. Such a tool
can provide speed effectively. This resource is suitable, mainly for re­
petitive cases, as this would be a way of treating a good part of the
demand for justice with a relatively low effort (Mayer, Britto, Lacerda, &
Karninke, 2018). Thus, professionals would be directed to deal with high
complexity cases, not trained by the machine.

Support resources generate indirect results, as they speed up manual
analysis and still allow the automation of other routines. Hypothetically
it makes possible the release of person-hours from the support area to
perform tasks in different segments.
Based on Table 1, which presents the perspectives for analyzing the
AI impacts on the Judiciary, we can conclude that the main positive
impact of AI implementation at the STF falls mainly under the efficiency
perspective because of the reduction in operational costs. We also
observe the perspectives of support and transparency. Therefore, we did
not find in the case study the negative aspects of inefficiency (low
financial return), objection (disagreement about use), and privacy (in­
formation security flaws).
However, the perspectives of agility (reduced working time) and
consistency (certainty in decisions) do not occur, since there is no time
reduction in the speedy trial and there is a 15% chance that the decisions
made by Victor are inaccurate. Thus, rigidity (low time reduction),
inconsistency (imprecision of the decision model) and, consequently,
infeasibility (damage to access to justice) are observed as negative
perspectives. It was impossible to examine the aspects of impartiality or
bias (absence or increase of bias in decisions) and precision or impre­
cision (reduction or persistence of human error in decisions) because the
STF AI was not operating in the judging segment.
This result confirms the AI analysis perspective reported in the
literature heretofore, demonstrating the possibility of examining the
impacts of AI solutions of the Judiciary from the perspective of acces­
sibility or infeasibility; agility or rigidity; consistency or inconsistency;
efficiency or inefficiency; impartiality or bias; precision or imprecision;
support or objection; transparency or privacy (Alarie et al., 2018; Car­
neiro et al., 2014; Kazim & Koshiyama, 2021; Krupiy, 2020; Mowbray
et al., 2020; Nakad-weststrate, Jongbloed, & Salem, 2015; NakadWeststrate, Jongbloed, van den Herik, & Salem, 2015; Ojiako et al.,
2018a; Xiao et al., 2021; Zeleznikow, 2002a). The results also demon­
strate the importance of care in implementing AI and its implications
(Janssen & Kuk, 2016). This fact does not prevent the use of AI. How­
ever, it reinforces the need to establish policies and governance struc­
tures to apply these technologies with the necessary security.
Although the case reported in this study presents concrete results
only from the efficiency perspective, it was possible to observe analysis
factors not previously indicated in the literature. Thus, one more rele­
vant perspective for analyzing the impact of AI on justice systems is
highlighted: repercussion. The concept of repercussion employed here
deals with a strategic vision of analysis and can be applied to the internal
or external environment of the organization, as follow:

5. Discussion
In this section, we will analyze the case study results in comparison
with the overview presented in the literature. We found that the high
volume of demand is the main factor of a negative impact on speed,
which causes the congestion of lawsuits, raising the cost of justice.
At this point, it is possible to verify that the managers assign the
responsibility for the body’s slowness to external factors. Nonetheless,
there can be solved, or at least mitigate, reviewing internal aspects,
which go through the organizational culture, by the judges’ personal
approaches and even by the legal elements that interfere in the progress
of the judicial activity.
We chose this study the screening stage because it is an automated
activity that does not involve ministers’ offices to avoid political inter­
ference and potentially relieve the Judgment stage. The procedural class
contemplated by the AI was that of EA because it represents the highest
demand from the Agency (80 thousand cases/year). Thus, through
cooperation between the STF and UnB, for $ 300 k, the Victor system has
been created, performing recognition of texts, plays, and subjects; makes
the classification of cases and the screening of RG—demonstrating the
potential of this type of technology to generate systemic gains (Alarie &
Yoon, 2017; Zeleznikow, 2017).
Of the 730 recognized GR subjects, only 29 are trained in AI, rep­
resenting 40% of the cases with identified GR subjects. The noninclusion of other subjects occurs due to the high randomness of the
information or because the subjects with the least cases have few sam­
ples, making it difficult to develop solutions based on AI. In this sense,
Reiling (2006) observed that the Judging function has the highest level
of randomness, alongside the Conciliator.
We also found in the case study that AI does not have direct effects on
speedy trial. In this sense, the STF’s AI does not significantly impact the
finalistic area, not increasing access to justice. However, it has an in­
direct impact due to the possibility of releasing people to act in the
judgment activity. Thus, it is possible to dismiss two professionals and
save approximately $ 106,228.43 annually, with a return on investment
(ROI) in 3 years. It confirms the potential contribution of this technology
to a more efficient legal system (Kling, 1989).
The consolidated representation of the impact of AI on speedy trial
(Fig. 8) demonstrates that, in the Judgment, AI resources can have a
direct impact on speedy trial. However, it is the most significant diver­
gence in the legal field (Langbroek, 2019), which needs good data
governance and attention to ethical dilemmas. Nevertheless, Scenario
Analysis, Jurisprudential Consultation, and Automatic Decision Making
have been used and can reduce judgment time. This type of resource is
suitable, mainly for the treatment of repetitive cases.
In Pre-judgment, AI resources can generate direct results for speed in
instances lower than the Supreme, using ODR, for example. Alterna­
tively, with the screening of services and procedural, which ends up
reducing the volume of cases that reach the judgment. Finally, the

i) Internal repercussion: the concept of internal repercussion refers to
the possibility of AI technology having repercussions on other ac­
tivities in the judicial system. The case study demonstrates that
technology can even interfere with the mood of employees inter­
nally. In this way, repercussion brings the idea of a chain reaction.
This perspective differs from the concept of support, which carries
the sense of assistance in specific activities.
ii) External repercussion: the case study demonstrates the possibility of
analyzing the repercussion of AI outside the organization of the
Judiciary. Although it may seem obvious, this activity may not be so
trivial. As demonstrated, the SFT’s AI brings benefits beyond that
Court since lower courts are dependent on the STF’s jurisprudence,
impacting the entire judicial system in Brazil. This perspective differs
from the concept of accessibility in that it applies an interorganizational sense.
In summary, the use of AI in the Support segment can speed up manual
analysis and automate other routines. This action can even impact
external organizations. The gain, despite being indirect, also occurs by
enabling the release of person-hours. Nevertheless, there are still many
opportunities to apply AI for more significant benefits in the Judiciary,
especially in the Judgment segment, to observe the impacts related to the
10

Government Information Quarterly 39 (2022) 101660

W.G. de Sousa et al.

about the impact of AI on speedy trial.
Analyzing AI applications in the judgment stage is also suggested to
observe other impacts that this technology can generate. In this way,
other analysis perspectives can also be considered, such as impartiality
or bias (absence or increase of bias in decisions) and precision or
imprecision (reduction or persistence of human error in decisions).
Another relevant point of analysis of AI in justice systems is the ethical
dilemmas. Therefore, future studies may focus on ethical issues related
to judging through AI.
In this study, the concept of repercussion is suggested to examine the
chain reactions of IA implementation on speedy trials, which can impact
internally and externally. Usually, academic research focuses on the
internal outcomes of applying IA to justice systems so that future studies
could examine the external impacts of this technology on other orga­
nizations or citizens. In addition, replicating this research in Supreme
Courts in other countries can generate scalable benefits in the profes­
sional field because of the possibility of reusing the identified techno­
logical resources.

perspectives of impartiality or bias and precision or imprecision.
6. Conclusion
The general scenario of the Judiciary is one of high procedural
congestion, generated by high demand and low speed in resolving cases.
The social repercussions of this situation are severe, which has placed
speed trial as a priority for courts worldwide. In this scenario, the AI
application stands out to solve this problem. The question that gave
meaning to the research (Artificial Intelligence and speedy trial in the
Judiciary: myth, reality or necessity? A case study in the Brazilian Su­
preme Court (STF) can be answered by the case study, which allowed us
to verify the application of AI in the case screening phase, characterized
by having low or no impact on speed. The interviewees reaffirmed this
difficulty in gaining speed, who believe that AI will create more benefits
in the sense of freeing people to perform more complex and less oper­
ational tasks. Hypothetically, this may contribute to speed to some de­
gree, but this could not be widely measured.
However, the materials collected in the bibliography demonstrated
that it is possible to apply AI to directly impact analysis and judgment
time. For example, solutions such as proposing sentences and assertively
searching for case law were cited in Section 2. Therefore, it is believed
that the gain in procedural speed with AI is not just a myth. It can
become a reality, but with limitations, because there is a long way be­
tween the use of this technology in merely operational tasks and its use
in complex activities such as the evaluation of processes in their entirety.
Considering this, we conclude three aspects: i) the lack of a definitive
and universal solution; ii) the benefits and perspectives of AI analysis in
the judicial system; and iii) the potential of AI for a speedy trial.
Therefore, it is necessary to take a broader and multidisciplinary look at
the impacts of AI on complex systems. This study presents a framework
that provides a good start for that. It is also important to note that the
impacts of AI are not trivial and can cause different and more compli­
cated effects than initially thought. Finally, it is understood that incor­
porating this resource in legal routines has become necessary, even if
there is no immediate improvement in the time it takes to resolve many
cases.

Authorship statement
All persons who meet authorship criteria are listed as authors, and all
authors certify that they have participated sufficiently in the work to
take public responsibility for the content, including participation in the
concept, design, analysis, writing, or revision of the manuscript.
Furthermore, each author certifies that this material or similar material
has not been and will not be submitted to or published in any other
publication before its appearance in the Government Information
Quarterly.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Weslei Gomes de Sousa: Project administration, Supervision,
Validation, Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing, Writing –
original draft. Rafael Antunes Fidelis: Writing – review & editing,
Writing – original draft, Methodology, Methodology, Formal analysis,
Investigation. Paulo Henrique de Souza Bermejo: Project adminis­
tration, Supervision, Validation, Conceptualization. Ana Gersica da
Silva Gonçalo: Writing – original draft, Formal analysis, Investigation,
Data curation. Bruno de Souza Melo: Writing – original draft, Meth­
odology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation

6.1. Limitations and proposals for future works
We carried out this research through a case study about a single
institution, which limited the potential for generalization of the ana­
lyses. Therefore, it is suggested that AI solutions developed in other
instances of justice be identified. Another limitation of this study is the
number of interviews conducted. We suggest that future researches
expand the number and profile of interviewees, also focusing on AI ex­
perts. The gap created by Zeleznikow (2017) and Langbroek (2019) can
be identified through quantitative research to determine generalizations

Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Indexing the collected content
Content index
(CIn)

Category

Title

Author (s)

Year

1
2
3

Technician
Technician
Technical/Business/
Result
Result

Document classification using a Bi-LSTM to unclog Brazil’s supreme Court
Document type classification for Brazil’s supreme court using a Convolutional Neural Network
Initial notes on the evolution of Victor’s algorithms: The first Artificial Intelligence project in the
World’s Supreme Courts
Victor Project: perspectives of application of artificial intelligence to law

Braz et al
Silva et al
Silva

2018
2018
2018
2018

Technical/Business
Result
Business
Result
Technical/Business/
Result

Victor Project: Vision document
Victor Project: presentation of results
Decentralized execution term no 1, 2018
Supreme in action 2018: base year 2017
Interview 1

Filho &
Junquilho
NS
NS
Peixoto & Toledo
CNJ
Interviewee 1

4
5
6
7
8
9

NS
NS
2018
2018
2019

(continued on next page)

11

W.G. de Sousa et al.

Government Information Quarterly 39 (2022) 101660

(continued )
Content index
(CIn)

Category

Title

Author (s)

Year

10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

Technician
Business
Result
Technical/Business
Business
Business/Technical
Result
Business

Interview 2
Interview 3
Federal Supreme Court - Activity Report 2016
Information Technology Master Plan - PDTI (2017/2018)
STF Internal Regulations
Digital STF Infrastructure
Consolidated information of general repercussion
STF remuneration

Interviewee 2
Interviewee 3
STF
STF
STF
STF
STF
STF

2019
2019
2017
2018
2019
NS
2019
2019

*NS = Not specified.

Appendix B. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2021.101660.

References

Filho, N. T. (2016). Composição dos Tribunais Superiores. In Consultoria Legislativa.
Flyvbjerg, B. (2001). Making social science matter. Cambridge University Press.
French, P. H. (1933). The automobile compensation plan (C. University (ed.)).
Friesen, E. C., & Information, C. (1984). Cures for Court Congestion The state of the art of
court delay reduction 1.
Gil, A. C. (1999). Métodos e técnicas de pesquisa social (5th ed.).
Godoy, A. S. (1995). Pesquisa qualitativa e suas possibilidades. Revista de Administração
de Empresas, 35(2), 57–63.
Gomes, A. O., Alves, S. T., & Silva, J. T. (2018). Effects of investment in information and
communication technologies on productivity of courts in Brazil. Government
Information Quarterly, 35(3), 480–490. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2018.06.002
Gonçalves, L. D. D. G. (2008). Virtualização como instrumento de celeridade para o
judiciário cearense. In Universidade Estadual Vale do Acaraú (pp. 1–50).
Guimarães, J. A. C., & Sales, R. (1997). Análise documental: concepções do universo
acadêmico brasileiro em Ciência da Informação. Revista de Ciência Da Informação, 11
(1).
Gupta, M., & Mago, J. (2013). Fuzzy Expert System to Evaluate the Quality of Service
Provider in the Implementation of E-Government. 67(18) pp. 16–22).
Ippoliti, R., Melcarne, A., & Ramello, G. B. (2014). Judicial efficiency and entrepreneurs’
expectations on the reliability of European legal systems. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10657-014-9456-x
Iriberri, A. (2015). Natural language processing and psychology in e-government
services. International Journal of Electronic Government Research, 11(2), 1–17. https://
doi.org/10.4018/IJEGR.2015040101
Janssen, M., Brous, P., Estevez, E., Barbosa, L. S., & Janowski, T. (2020). Data
governance: Organizing data for trustworthy artificial intelligence. Government
Information Quarterly, 37(3), Article 101493. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
giq.2020.101493
Janssen, M., & Kuk, G. (2016). The challenges and limits of big data algorithms in
technocratic governance. Government Information Quarterly, 33(3), 371–377. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2016.08.011
Julius, T. (2018). Artificial intelligence in court legitimacy problems of AI assistance in
the judiciary. Copenhagen Journal of Legal Studies, 2(1).
Kankanhalli, A., Charalabidis, Y., & Mellouli, S. (2019). IoT and AI for smart government:
A research agenda. Government Information Quarterly, 36, 304–309. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.giq.2019.02.003
Kazim, E., & Koshiyama, A. S. (2021). A high-level overview of AI ethics. Patterns, 2(9),
Article 100314. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2021.100314
Kling, R. (1989). The potential of artificial intelligence to help solve the crisis in our legal
system. Communications of the ACM, 32(8), 928–938.
Krupiy, T. (2020). A vulnerability analysis: Theorising the impact of artificial intelligence
decision-making processes on individuals, society and human diversity from a social
justice perspective. Computer Law and Security Review, 38, Article 105429. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2020.105429
Kum, H. C., Duncan, D. F., & Stewart, C. J. (2009). Supporting self-evaluation in local
government via knowledge discovery and data mining. Government Information
Quarterly, 26(2), 295–304. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2008.12.009
Langbroek, P. (2019). The Court Administrator: Why Judges Should Be In Control: IT’s and
Artificial Intelligence may improve courts services but are no panacea for backlogs and
speeding up proceedings (p. 5). International Association for Cout Administration.
Lee, R. W. (1998). Pesquisa Jurisprudencial Inteligente. Universidade Federal de Santa
Catarina.
Levmore, S., & Fagan, F. (2019). The impact of artificial intelligence on rules , standards ,
and judicial discretion. Southern California Law Review.
Liddy, E. D. (2001). Natural language processing. In Encyclopedia of library and
Information science (2nd ed.). Marcel Decker, Inc.
Magalhães, R. V. (2005). Inteligência Artificial e Direito – Uma breve introdução
histórica. Revista Direito e Liberdade, 1, 355–370.
Mahfouz, T., & Kandil, A. (2012). Litigation outcome prediction of differing site
condition disputes through machine learning models. Journal of Computing in Civil
Engineering, 26(June), 298–308. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)CP.19435487.0000148

Alarie, B., Niblett, A., & Yoon, A. H. (2018). How artificial intelligence will affect the
practice of law. University of Toronto Law Journal, 68(March 2017), 106–124.
https://doi.org/10.3138/utlj.2017-0052
Alarie, B., & Yoon, A. H. (2017). How artificial intelligence will affect the practice of law.
In Artificial Intelligence, Technology and the Future of Law (pp. 1–15).
Alshahrani, A., Dennehy, D., & Mäntymäki, M. (2021). An attention-based view of AI
assimilation in public sector organizations: The case of Saudi Arabia. Government
Information Quarterly. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2021.101617
Andersen, K. V., & Danziger, J. N. (1995). Information technology and the political
world: the impacts of it on capabilities , interactions , orientations and values.
International Journal of Public Administration, 2015, 37–41. https://doi.org/10.1080/
01900698608525070
Andrade, A., & Joia, L. A. (2012). Organizational structure and ICT strategies in the
Brazilian judiciary system. Government Information Quarterly, 29(Suppl. 1), S32–S42.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2011.08.003
Arditi, D., & Pulket, T. (2010). Predicting the outcome of construction litigation using an
integrated artificial intelligence model. Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering, 24
(February), 73–80.
Bačić, B. (2016). Predicting golf ball trajectories from swing plane: An artificial neural
networks approach. Expert Systems with Applications, 65, 423–438. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.eswa.2016.07.014
Bardin, L. (2016). Análise de Conteúdo. Presses Universitaires de France.
Baškarada, S. (2014). Qualitative Case Study Guidelines. Defence Science and Technology
Organisation, 19(40), 1–18.
Bielen, S., Peeters, L., Marneffe, W., & Vereeck, L. (2017). Accepted manuscript
equilibrium across European judiciaries backlogs and litigation rates. International
Review of Law & Economics.. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.irle.2017.09.002
Bobrow, D. G., & Raphael, B. (1974). New programming languages for artificial
intelligence research. ACM Comput. Surv. Article, 6(3), 153–174. https://doi.org/
10.1145/356631.356632
Brasil, S. T. F. (STF). (2020). Relatório Anual de Atividades - 2020. http://www.stf.jus.
br/arquivo/cms/publicacaoCatalogoProdutoConteudoTextual/anexo/RelatorioAt
ividadesSTF2020.pdf.
Brasil.. (1988). Constituição da República Federativa do Brasil. https://doi.org/10.4304/
jcp.6.9.1903-1912
Burrel, G., & Morgan, G. (1979). Sociological paradigms and Organisational analysis.
Elements of the Sociology of Corporate Life.
Bush, V. (1945). As We May Think. The Atlantic Monthly, July 1945.
Carneiro, D., Novais, P., Andrade, F., Zeleznikow, J., & Neves, J. (2014). Online dispute
resolution: An artificial intelligence perspective. Artificial Intelligence Review, 41(2),
211–240. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-011-9305-z
Castell, S. (2018). The future decisions of RoboJudge HHJ Arthur Ian Blockchain : Dread
, delight or derision ? Computer law & security review. The International Journal of
Technology Law and Practice, 34(4), 739–753. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
clsr.2018.05.011
Chen, T., Guo, W., Gao, X., & Liang, Z. (2019). AI-based self-service technology in public
service delivery: User experience and influencing factors. Government Information
Quarterly, October, 2020, 101520. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2020.101520
Chun, A. H. W. (2008). An AI framework for the automatic assessment of e-government
forms. AI Magazine, 29(1), 52–64. https://doi.org/10.1609/aimag.v29i1.2086
CNJ. (2018). Presidência do CNJ - Gestão - Setembro a Dezembro de 2018.
CNJ. (2018b). Supremo em ação 2018: ano-base 2017.
da Costa, E. V. (2006). O Supremo Tribunal Federal e a construção da cidadania.
Dakolias, M. (1999). Court performance around the world: A comparative perspective.
Yale Human Rights and Development Journal, 2(1), 87–142.
Dissony, T. H. E., Freedom, B., Systems, R., The, I. N., Of, L., Prism, T. H. E., …
Justice, T. O. (2018). A dissonância entre a liberdade e os sistemas repressivos à luz
do prisma do acesso à justiça. Uniandrade, 20.
Dutta, P., Hans, M., Mishra, M., Patnaik, I., Roy, S., Sapatnekar, S., … Sapatnekar, S.
(2019). How to Modernise the Working of Courts and Tribunals in India How to
Modernise the Working of Courts and Tribunals in India (p. 258).

12

Government Information Quarterly 39 (2022) 101660

W.G. de Sousa et al.
Mairiza, D., Zowghi, D., & Nurmuliani, N. (2010). An investigation into the notion of
non-functional requirements. Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology,
311–317.
Manzi, J. E. (2004). Da morosidade do Poder Judiciário e algumas possíveis soluções. Jus
Navigandi, 337(8).
de Marconi, M., & Lakatos, E. M. (2017). Fundamentos de Metodologia Científica (Atlas ed.)
(8th ed.).
de Martins, G., & Theóphilo, C. R. (2016). Metodologia da investigação científica para
ciências sociais aplicadas (Atlas ed.) (3rd ed.).
Maule, R., Schacher, G., & Gallup, S. (2002). Knowledge management for the analysis of
complex experimentation. Internet Research, 12(5), 427–435. https://doi.org/
10.1108/10662240210447173
Mayer, L., Britto, T., Lacerda, L. R., & Karninke, T. M. (2018). A crise do
congestionamento do Poder Judiciário e a ingerência dos conflitos de massa no
prejuízo do acesso à justiça. In Seriam as técnicas coletivas de repercussão individual
instrumentos necessários para desestimular a litigância habitual? Anais Do III Congresso
de Processo Civil Internacional.
Medeiros, J. B. (2006). Redação Científica - A Prática de Fichamentos, Resumos, Resenhas.
Mery, R. (2015). Court fees: Charging the user as a way to mitigate judicial congestion.
Journal of Law and Economics, 1(August).
Mikalef, P., Lemmer, K., Schaefer, C., Ylinen, M., Fjørtoft, S. O., Torvatn, H. Y., …
Niehaves, B. (2021). Enabling AI capabilities in government agencies: A study of
determinants for European municipalities. Government Information Quarterly. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2021.101596
Mowbray, A., Chung, P., & Greenleaf, G. (2020). Utilising AI in the legal assistance
sector—Testing a role for legal information institutes. Computer Law and Security
Review, 38, Article 105407. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2020.105407
Nakad-Weststrate, H., Jongbloed, T., van den Herik, J., & Salem, M. (2015). Digitally
produced Judgements in modern court proceedings. International Journal for Digital
Society, 6(4), 1102–1112. https://doi.org/10.20533/ijds.2040.2570.2015.0135
Nakad-weststrate, H. W. R. H., Jongbloed, A. W. T., & Salem, A. M. (2015). Digitally
produced Judgements in modern court proceedings. International Journal of Digital
Society, 6(4), 1102–1112.
Naresh, M. (2001). Pesquisa de marketing: uma orientação aplicada (Bookman ed.) (3rd
ed.).
Netten, N., Van Braak, S., Den Choenni, S., & Leeuw, F. (2016). The rise of smart Justice :
On the role of AI in the future of legal logistics. In AI4J: Artificial Intelligence for
Justice Workshop (pp. 38–41).
Nilsson, N. J. (1971). Problem-Solving Methods in Artificial Intelligence. Artificial
Intelligence Group Stanford Research Instute.
Ojiako, U., Chipulu, M., Marshall, A., & Williams, T. (2018a). An examination of the ‘rule
of law’ and ‘justice’ implications in online dispute resolution in construction
projects. International Journal of Project Management, 36(2), 301–316. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2017.10.002
Ojiako, U., Chipulu, M., Marshall, A., & Williams, T. (2018b). ScienceDirect an
examination of the ‘ rule of law ’ and ‘ justice ’ implications in online dispute
resolution in construction projects. International Journal of Project Management, 36
(2), 301–316. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2017.10.002
Okuda, T., Shiotani, S., Sakamoto, N., & Kobayashi, T. (2013). Background and current
status of postmortem imaging in Japan: Short history of “ Autopsy imaging (Ai)”.
Forensic Science International, 225(1–3), 3–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
forsciint.2012.03.010
Oliveira, H. S. (2017). Celeridade Processual: breves comentários à luz do direito
comparado. Anais Do I Congresso Rondoniense de Carreiras Jurídicas, 144–157.
Oliveira, S. R., & Costa, R. S. (2019). Pode a máquina julgar? Considerações sobre o uso
de Inteligência Artificial no processo de decisão judicial. Revista de Argumentação e
Hermeneutica Jurídica, 4(2), 21–39. https://doi.org/10.26668/IndexLawJournals/
2526-0103/2018.v4i2.4796
Omoteso, K. (2012). The application of artificial intelligence in auditing: Looking back to
the future. Expert Systems with Applications, 39(9), 8490–8495. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.eswa.2012.01.098
Orlando, L. P. (2018). A uniformização jurisprudencial imposta pelo novo código de
processo civil e a possibilidade do uso de inteligência artificial pelas cortes. In 7◦
Simpósio de Sustentabilidade (pp. 1–15).
Raja, G. T., Malmathanraj, R., & Arun, M. (2012). Document clustering using learning
from examples. International Journal of Computer Applications, 39(12), 17–24.
Reiling, D. (2006). Doing Justice with Information technology. Information &
Communications Technology Law, 15(2). https://doi.org/10.1080/
13600830600676685
Rodrigues, R. (2020). Legal and human rights issues of AI: Gaps, challenges and
vulnerabilities. Journal of Responsible Technology, 4(August), Article 100005. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jrt.2020.100005
Rosenthal, J. S., & Yoon, A. H. (2011). Detecting multiple authorship of United States
supreme court legal decisions using function words. The Annals of Applied Statistics, 5
(1), 283–308. https://doi.org/10.1214/10-AOAS378
Rover, A. J. (2010). Informática no direito, inteligência artificial: introdução aos sistemas
especialistas legais (J. Editora ed.) (1st ed.).
Sadek, M. T. (2010). A crise do judiciário vista pelos juízes: resultados de uma pesquisa
quantitativa. Centro Edelstein de Pesquisas Sociais, 17–31.
Santos, G. A., & Melo, A. F. M. (2017). A realidade da justiça em números: um estudo
sobre as principais causas da morosidade da justiça. Direitos Fundamentais & Justiça,
95–114.
de Sousa, W. G., De Melo, E. R. P., De Souza, P. H. B., Farias, R. A. S., & Gomes, A. O.
(2019). How and where is artificial intelligence in the public sector going? A
literature review and research agenda. Government Information quarterly, (July),
101392. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2019.07.004

Soy, S. (1997). The case study as a research Method. Uses and Users of Information.
Staats, J. L., Bowler, S., Hiskey, J. T., Staats, J. L., & Thiskey, J. (2016). Measuring Judicial
Performance in Latin America Published by : Distributed by Wiley on behalf of the Center
for Latin American Studies at the University of Miami Stable. 47(4) pp. 77–106).
Supremo Tribunal Federal. (2019). Relatório de atividades 2019 / Supremo Tribunal
Federal. http://www.stf.jus.br/arquivo/cms/centralDoCidadaoAcessoInformacaoGe
staoEstrategica/anexo/2020_01_24_13.08_RelatoriodeAtividades2019_completo.pdf.
Taeihagh, A. (2021). Governance of artificial intelligence. Policy and Society, 40(2),
137–157. https://doi.org/10.1080/14494035.2021.1928377
Tartuce, F. (2019). As técnicas de julgamento de casos repetitivos e a triagem de
processos e recursos sob a perspectiva do acesso à justiça. Revista Dos Tribunais
Online, 288, 275–299.
Tecuci, G. (2012). Artificial intelligence. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational
Statistics, 4(2), 168–180. https://doi.org/10.1002/wics.200
Tepedino, G., & Silva, G. (2019). Desafios da Inteligência Artificial em matéria de
responsabilidade civil. Revista Brasileira de Direito Civil, 21, 61–86. https://doi.org/
10.33242/rbdc.2019.03.004
Tomsett, R., Preece, A., Braines, D., Cerutti, F., Chakraborty, S., Srivastava, M., …
Kaplan, L. (2020). Rapid trust calibration through interpretable and uncertaintyaware AI. Patterns, 1(4), Article 100049. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
patter.2020.100049
Vereeck, L., & Muhl, M. (2000). An economic theory of court delay. European Journal of
Law and Economics, 243–268.
Vergara, S. (1998). Projetos e relatórios de pesquisa em administração.
Viechnicki, P., & Eggers, W. D. (2017). How much time and money can AI save government ?
Cognitive technologies could free up hundreds of millions of.
Voigt, S. (2016). Determinants of judicial efficiency: A survey. European Journal of Law &
Economics, 42(2), 183–208.
Wachter, S., Mittelstadt, B., & Russell, C. (2021). Why fairness cannot be automated:
Bridging the gap between EU non-discrimination law and AI. Computer Law and
Security Review, 41, Article 105567. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2021.105567
Wallace, A. (2017). From The Editor : The Impact of Technology on Courts.. 8(2) p. 18352).
https://doi.org/10.18352/ijca.236
Waterman, D. A., & Newell, A. (1971). Protocol analysis as a task for artificial
intelligence. Artificial Intelligence, 2, 285–318. https://doi.org/10.1016/0004-3702
(71)90014-2
Weber, R. (1999). Intelligent jurisprudence research: A new concept. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, April 2003 (pp. 164–172).
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1868305
Whalen-bridge, H. (2019). Court backlogs : Balancing efficiency and justice in Singapore.
International Journal of the Legal Profession, 5958, 159–177. https://doi.org/10.1080/
09695958.2018.1490298
Wilmot, S. (2007). From “public service” to artificial insemination: Animal breeding
science and reproductive research in early twentieth-century Britain. Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science Part C :Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological
and Biomedical Sciences, 38(2), 411–441. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
shpsc.2007.03.007
Xiao, C., Hu, X., Liu, Z., Tu, C., & Sun, M. (2021). Lawformer: A pre-trained language
model for Chinese legal long documents. AI Open, 2(June), 79–84. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.aiopen.2021.06.003
Yin, R. K. (1984). Case study research design and methods. In , Vol. 2. Sage.
Zeleznikow, J. (2002a). Using web-based legal decision support systems to improve
access to justice. International Journal of Phytoremediation, 21(1), 15–33. https://doi.
org/10.1080/13600830220133530
Zeleznikow, J. (2002b). Using web-based legal decision support Systems to improve
Access to Justice. Information & Communications Technology Law, 11:1(October
2014), 15–33. https://doi.org/10.1080/13600830220133530
Zeleznikow, J. (2017). Can artificial intelligence and online dispute resolution enhance
efficiency and effectiveness in courts. International Journal for Court Administration, 8
(2), 30. https://doi.org/10.18352/ijca.223
Zuckerman, A. A. S. (1999). Justice in crisis: Comparative dimensions of civil procedure (p.
8/9). Oxford.
Zuiderwijk, A., Chen, Y. C., & Salem, F. (2021). Implications of the use of artificial
intelligence in public governance: A systematic literature review and a research
agenda. Government Information Quarterly, 38(3), Article 101577. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.giq.2021.101577

Weslei Gomes de Sousa is Graduated in Electrical Engineering
by Institute of Higher Education of Brasilia, with specialization
in Software Engineering and MBA in Business Intelligence.
Master’s in business administration from the University of
Brasília (UnB). Project Management Professional (PMP) certi­
fied by the Project Management Institute (PMI). Professor in
disciplines related to management and information systems.
His researches are focused on evaluation and seeking ways to
improve the efficiency of routines and processes in public
sector. In general, the initiatives are related on application of
information technology or the impact of the use of IT. Recently,
his publication entitled “Analysis of variables for measuring the
efficiency of public spending by function of government” was
published by the journal Administração Pública e Gestão Social. Another important work,
named “How and where is artificial intelligence in the public sector going? A literature
review and research agenda” is published by Government Information Quarterly.

13

